<OU_1 64681 



OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

UlNo. 1^M33B Accession No. 30094 

pthor Marcel , G 

Me Being and having 

This book should b.e returned on or before the date last marked below. 



BEING AND HAVING 



BEING AND HAVING 

by 
GABRIEL MARCEL 

a translation by 
KATHARINE FARRER 

of Eire et Avoir 




dacre press 
Westminster 



First published in 
Printed by Robert MacLebose and Company Limited 
The University Press } Glasgow 



PREFACE 

It is my great privilege to be allowed to write a preface to this 
book. In a sense it is its own advertisement: yet in some ways 
its form is rather unusual. The greater part consists in extracts 
disjointed and repetitive, from a metaphysical diary; the jottings 
of a thinker concerned to speak with himself rather than to an 
audience. Some readers would be well advised to postpone reading 
the diary extracts till they have tackled some of the more systematic 
studies contained in the second half of the volume. 

But no one can fail to profit from M. Marcel's work, provided he 
takes it seriously, provided, that is, he doesn't go to him as a 
^eading.Christian existentialist' whom he must read in order to* be 
in the mode! M. Marcel deprecates the label, preferring to call 
himself 'a concrete philosopher' that is a philosopher who is not 
prepared to sacrifice to the demands of systematic natures sensitivity 
to the rough edges of human life. 

I hope that this book will be widely read, and I especially com- 
mend it to four classes of persons: 

i. For myself I have come across nothing more important than 
M. Marcel's writings here and elsewhere on the problem of meta- 
physics. I say problem advisedly: for we are all of us these days in 
the end puzzled as to what exactly metaphysics is. 

The strict Thomist has his answer: so has the positivist: so too 
the Biblical theologian who is much too ready to find in the decay 
of ontology an argument for the authenticity of 'Biblical per- 
spectives*. A^A^celjvaiJi^ined in the tradition ofjdealism: and 
he knew the influence both of Bergsen and ofW. E. Hocking. His 
conversation with himself certainly betrays their influences: but it 
is of far wider significance. Professor Ayer and Dr. E. L. Mascall 

i 



have their answer .to the question what ontology is: they have their 
formulae. Marcel probes beneath these answers; Jpr him ontology 
is much more than a body of doctrine. It is the intellectual ex- 
pression of the human situation; what is expressed in the syllogisms 
of, for instance, Pere Garrigou-Lagrange, is valid only in so far 
as it catches and summarises the very being of man and the 
universe, as that being is lived through and met with "by man in 
his pilgrimage through life. 

I find as I read M. Marcel that the frontiers are blurrec 
ethical reflection, metaphysics, spirituality. And that is the strength 
of his seemingly inconsequent method. In a way he is too wise to 
suppose that the arguments ofthepbilosopbiaperennis are enough in 
their abstract form to convince a man; they only carry conviction in 
relation to a whole experience of life of which they are the ex- 
pression. The issues between the Thomist, the positivist, the idealist 
are not issues simply of doctrine but of life; and to see what they are, 
one must probe, stretching language beyond the frontiers of poetry, 
somehow to convey the issues as things through which men live. 

2. The book should be studied closely by the moralist whether he 
be philosopher or moral theologian. Where some of the most 
familiar ethical ideas are concerned, Marcel reminds us of their 
'inside* when we so often in our discussion think simply of their 
'outside*. What is a promise? We have our answer pat, our formula 
which permits us to go on with the discussion of our obligations to 
keep the promises we have made and so on. We don't wait to probe. 
I find myself inevitably using that word 'probe* again and again in 
connection with M. Marcel: for what he does is to probe the un- 
suspected profundities of the familiar. Most professional students of 
ethics are morally philistine, men who give little time to penetrating 
the 'inside* of the ideas they are handling. And there Marcel pulls 
them up short. 

3. The book should be widely read by the many Christian 



'fellow-travellers' of today, those who follow, as it were, afar off the 
Christian way without themselves coming yet to the point of an 
act of faith in the Crucified. Its very incompleteness will respond to 
their groping anxiety, and it will enrich their vision of life. And 
this it can do because it eschews dogmatic exposition seeking 
rather to shew the inside of the truly Christian way of life. Fidelity, 
hope, chirity, mystery these are fundamental categories of the 
Christian way: and of all these Marcel has much to say, which is 
in every way fresh and yet at the same time rootedjnjhe tradition 
of Catholic Christianity. 

The reader of such a work as Albert Camus' La Peste, with its 
preoccupation with the problem of a^^atheistic sanctity, will 
understand M. Marcel. In a way he challenges the possibility of 
Camus' vision; and he does so not on dogmatic grounds but by an 
analysis o holiness and goodness which shews indirectly their 
inseparability from acknowledgment of the all-embracing mystery 
of .God. An age which has known evil as ours has and does still 
know it, is inevitably interested in goodness; and it jsjwith good- 
ness, as something inevitably issuing out of God becausca-giftfrom 
him, that Marcel's studies deal. 

4. And lastly I commend this book because at a time when 
minuteness and subtlety of mind are too often the prerogatives of 
the light-heartedly destructive, he reminds us that a true minuteness 
and a true intellectual subtlety are rooted in humility and^urity. of 
heart, and manifest the soil in which they are nourished by 
^raciousness whose charm none can escape and a strength of 
argument which none can break. 

D. M. MACKINNON 
King's College 
Old Aberdeen 
February, 1949 



CONTENTS 

PART ONE: BEING AND HAVING 

I. A Metaphysical Diary page 9 

II. Outlines of a Phenomenology of Having page 154 

PART TWO: FAITH AND REALITY 

I. Some Remarks on the Irreligion of Today page 179 

II. Some Thoughts on Faith page 203 

HI. Peter Wust on the Nature of Piety page 217 



PART ONE 
BEING AND HAVING 



I 

A METAPHYSICAL DIARY 

(1928-1933) 

November wtb 1928 

I have today made a firm resolve to continue my metaphysical 
diary, perhaps in the form of a series of consecutive reflections. 
I caught sight of an idea just now which might be important. 
Returning to my fundamental views on existence, I was wondering 
whether it is possible to say in any sense that an idea^exists; and this 
is how I see it. The idea, so far as it is represented on the pattern of] 
an object (I was thinking the other day of what we mean by the 
aspects of an idea) shares with the object as such the characteristic/ 
of non-existence, the object only existing in so far as k shares in 
the nature of my body, i.e. in so far as it is not thought of as object.] 
In the same way, must we not say that an idea can and does have 
existence, but only and exactly in so far as it is irreducible to the 
pseudo-objective representations which we form of it? The 
materialist interpretation, however absurd in itself, does at least 
imply a confused notion of what I am trying to get at here. We 
might say that an idea exists proportionately to its being more dr 
less adherent. I should like to find some concrete examples for illus- 
tration, but this is of course very difficult to do. The starting point 
of my reflections the other day was the idea of an event (X's opera- 
tion) which I had many reasons to be anxious about. One might 
have said that I revolved the idea, or that it revolved of itself, and 
showed me its different aspects in turn; i.e. I thought of it by 
analogy with a three-dimensional object, a die for instance. 

November 22nd 

An interesting point. Is responsibility, or rather the need to attri- 

9 



bute responsibility the need to have something or someone to fix it 
on at the root of all 'causal explanation'? I feel that this might take 
us a long way. It seems to me very near to Nietzchean psychology. 

N'OTES FOR A PAPER TO THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY 

Undated, written in 1927 or I928 1 

When I affirm that something exists, I always mean that I con- 
sider this something as connected with my body, as able to be put 
in contact with it, however indirect this contact may be. But note 
must be taken that the priority I thus ascribe to my body depends on 
the fact that my body is given to me in a way that is not exclusively 
objective, i.e. on the fact that it is my body. This character, at once 
mysterious and intimate, of the bond between me and my^ body (I 
purposely avoid the word relation) does in fact colour all existential 
judgments. 

What it comes 10 is this. We cannot really separate: 

1. Existence 

2. Consciousness of self as existing 

3. Consciousness of self as bound to a body, as incarnate. 
From this several important conclusions would seem to follow: 

(1) In the first place, the existential point of view about reality 
cannot^ it seems^be othet than that of an incatnatejgersonality. In 
so far as we can imagine a pure understanding, there is, for such an 
understanding, no possibility of considering things as existent or 
non-existent. 

(2) On the oae hand, the problem of the existence of the external 
world is now changed and perhaps even loses its meaning; I cannot 
in fact without contradiction think of my body as non-existent, 
since it is in connection with it (in so far as it is my body) that 

is .defined andjphced^On the other hand, we 

x This paper was never delivered. 
10 



ought to ask whether there are valid reasons for giving my body a 
privileged metaphysical status in comparison with other things. 

(3) If this is so, it is permissible to ask whether die union of the 
souljind body is, in essence, really different from the union between 
the soul and other existing things. In other words, does not a 
certain experience of the self, as tied up with the universe, underlie 
all affirmation of existence? 

(4) Inquire whether such an interpretation of the existential 
leads towards subjectivism. 

(5) Shew how idealism tends inevitably to eliminate all existen- 
tial considerations in view of the fundamental unintelligibility of 
existence. Idealism versus ^metaphysics. Values detached from 
existence: too real to exist. 

Existential and personalist interests Closely, linked. The problem 
of the immortality of the soul is the pivot of metaphysic. 

Every existent is thought of like an obstacle by which we take 
our bearings like something we could collide with in certain 
circumstances resistent, impenetrable. We think of this impenetra- 
bility, no doubt, but we think of it as not completely thinkable. 1 
Just as my body is thought of in so far as it is a body, but my thought 
collides with the fact that it is my body. 

To say that something exists is not only to say that it belongs to 
the same system as my body (that it is bound to it by certain con- 
nections which reason can define), it is also to say that it is in some 
way united to me as my body is. 

Incarnation the central 'given* of metaphysic. Incarnation is 
the situation of a being who appears to himself to be, as it were, 
. This 'given* is opaque to itself: opposition to the 



1 It is thought of, but it is never resolved. The opacity of the world is in 
a certain sense insoluble. The link between opacity and Meinbeit. My 
idea is opaque to me personally in so far as it is mine. We think of it as an 
adherence. (Note written Feb. 24th, 1929.) 

II 



cogito. Of this body, I can neither say that it is I, nor that it is not 
I, nor that it is for me (object). The opposition of subject and object 
is found to be transcended from the start. Inversely, if I start from 
the opposition, treating it as fundamental, I shall find no trick of 
logical sleight of hand which lets me get back to the original 
experience, which will inevitably be either eluded or (which comes 
to the same thing) refused. We are not to object that this experience 
shews a contingent character: in point of fact, all metaphysical 
enquiry requires a starting-point of this kind. It can only start from 
a situation which is mirrored but cannot be understood. 

Inquire if incarnation is a fact; it does not seem so to me, it is the 
'given* starting from which a fact is possible (which is not true of 
the cogito). 

A fundamental predicament which cannot be in a strict sense 
masterecTor analysed. It is exactly this impossibility which is being 
stated when I declare, confusedly, that I am my body; i.e. I cannot 
quite treat myself as a term distinct from my body, a term which 
would be in a definable connection with it. As I have said else- 
where, the moment I treat my body as an object of scientific know- 
ledge, I banish myself to infinity. 

This is the reason why I cannot think of my death, but only of the 
standstill of that machine (illam, not bane). It would perhaps be 
more accurate to say that I cannot anticipate my death, that is, I 
cannot ask myself what will become of me when the machine is no 
longer working. 1 

1 'To be involved/ (idee d'un engagement) Try to shew in what sense this 
implies the impossibility (or absolute non-validity) of my representing 
my death. In trying to think of my death I break the rules of the game, 
But it is radically illegitimate to convert this impossibility into a dogmatic 
negation. (Note written Feb. 24th, 1929.) 

It is evident that this whole train of thought is at the root ode Cower- 
nail: the first notes on the theme of le Gowernail were composed a few 
days after these. (Note written April 1 3th, 1934.) 

12 



February 2<)tb 

Have detected, perhaps, an important fallacy involved in the idea 
(cf. my previous notes on incarnation) that opacity must be bound 
up with otherness. But surely the contrary is really the case. Surely 
opacity really arises from the fact that the T interposes between 
the self and the other, and intervenes as a third party? 

The obscurity of the external world is a function of my own 
obscurity to myself; the world has no intrinsic obscurity. Should 
we say that it comes to the same thing in the end? We must ask up 
to what point this interior opacity is a result; is it not very largely 
the consequence of an act? and is not this act simply sin? 

My ideas are hardest for me to grasp where they are most com- 
pletely my ideas; that is where they are impenetrable to me. 1 The 
problem I am setting myself is to find out whether this applies to 
the whole of reality. Is not reality impenetrable to me just in pro- 
portion as I am involved in it? 2 

Of course all this is horribly difficult to think out clearly. In a 
different terminology (that of the Journal Me'tapbysique) I could 
easily say that in so far as my body is an absolute mediator, I so far 
cease to have communication with it (in the sense that I have 
communication with any objective sector of the Real). Let us say 
again that my body is not and cannot be given to me. For every- 
thing 'given* attracts to itself a process of indefinite qbjectification, 
and that is what I understand by the word 'penetrable'. 3 The im- 

1 And where they become a principle of interior darkening; to this 
extent, in fact, they dominate me and make me into a sort of slave-tyrant. 
Light is thrown on all this by le Pbtnomtnologie de V Avoir outlined 
in 1933. (Note written April I3th, 1934.) 

2 1 was here anticipating what I wrote later on 'Mystery'. But this 
passage surely implies a confusion between opacity and mystery (/i). 

3 Here, too, there appears to me to be a confusion: the object as such 
is by definition accessible to me, but not penetrable. It is the Other, or 
more exactly the Thou, which is penetrable (/A). 

13 



penetraomty, men, 01 my ooay oeiongs to it in virtue ot its quality 
of absolute mediator. But it is obvious that my body, in that sense, 
is myself; for I cannot distinguish myself from it unless I am willing 
to reduce it to an object, i.e. unless I cease to treat it as an absolute 
mediator. 

We must, therefore, break away once and for ail from the meta- 
phors which depict consciousness as a luminous cilrcle round 
which there is nothing, to its own eyes, but darkness. On the 
contrary, the shadow is at the centre. 

When I try to make clear to myself the nature of my bond with 
my body, it appears to me chiefly as something of which I have the 
use (as one has the use of a piano, a saw, or a razor); but all these 
uses are extensions of the initial use, which is simply the use of the 
body. I have real priority to my body when it is a question of active 
use, but none whatever when it is a question of knowledge. The 
use is only possible on the basis of a certain felt community. But 
the community is indivisible; I cannot validly say *I and my body*. 
The difficulty arises from the fact that I think of my relation with 
my body on the analogy of my relation with my instruments 
whereas in fact the latter presupposes the former. 

February i8tb, i<)2<) 

I was thinking this afternoon (with regard to the meeting to take 
place on the 9th at the rue Viscontf) that the only possible victory 
over time must have fidelity as one of its factors. (Cf. Nietzche's 
remark so profound 'man is the only being who makes 
promises*.) There is no privileged state which allows us to transcend 
time; and this was where Proust made his great mistake. A state 
such as he describes has only the value of a foretaste. This notion of 
a foretaste is, I feel, likely to play a more and more central part in 
my thinking. But one point must be noticed (and here I think I 
part company with Fernandez): the fidelity, unless it is to be fruit- 

14 



less or, worse, reduced to mere persistency, must spring from 
something that is "absolutely given 9 to me. (I feel this is especially 
true in my relation to the people I love best.) From the very begin- 
ning there must be a sense of stewardship: something has been 
entrusted to us, so that we are not only responsible towards our- 
selves, but towards an active and superior principle and how it 
goes against my inclinations to use such a disgustingly abstract 
word! 

As I was writing to M , I at once fear and long to commit 
myself. But here again I feel that at the very beginning there was 
something else beyond myself a commitment that I accepted after 
an offer had been made to the most hidden depths of my being. The 
question is, how can I deserve it? It is strange and yet so clear 
that I shall only continue to believe if I continue to deserve my 
faith. Amazing interdependence between believing and desert! 

March $tb 

I have no more doubts. This morning's happiness is miraculous. 
For the first time I have clearly experienced grace. A terrible thing to 
say, but so it is. 

I 1m hemmed in at last by Christianity in, fathoms deep. 
Happy to be so! But I will write no more. 

And yet, I feel a kind of need to write. Feel I am stammering 
childishly . . . this is indeed a birth. Everything is different. 

Now, too, I can see my way through my improvisations. A new 
metaphor, the inverse of the other a world which was there, 
entirely present, and at last I can touch it. 

March 6tb 

Notes on time; I feel they must be important. So far as the subject 
is thought of as pure receptivity, the problem of the relations be- 
tween time and the timeless is comparatively simple: I can, in fact, 

15 



conceive of myself as apprehending successively something which 
is, in a certain sense, given all at once (a metaphor from reading). 
But this is merely an abstraction. The subject is not pure receptivity; 
or, more accurately, apprehension is itself an event (an indefinite 
series of events it is carried by a series of events inseparable from 
the story it discloses). In other words, the subject is involved qua 
agent (and he has the character of receptivity only on condition of 
being at the same time an agent) in the content which he was 
supposed merely to decipher. An extraordinarily complicated 
situation which I must manage to think about. I am sure I am on 
the right lines, but shall I manage to work them out? 

Put it formally. Given the intelligible total, jth^j^www/ which 
Ijyill call L, Ij^lljmake A stand for the reading of it, the total of 
operations t>y which I gradually gain consciousness of its elements. 
The reading splits itself up into Ai, A2, AS, but these steps in c6n- 
sciousness are obviously related to acts ai 9 02, 03. These acts, how- 
ever, appear on reflection to be completely exterior, indifferent to L 
(and to the steps by which it appears that this L has been built up, 
steps which, we must clearly see, belong to the past). Notice that 
the fact of these steps belonging to the past is closely connected 
with another fact, viz. that^Ljrepresents itself to me as an object 
(book, picture of which I successively discern the parts, etc.). 

We can now imagine a more complex case. Suppose I am 
present at an improvisatjion.(I). I Jim conscious, sj^ssskely^of |fo 
phases of this improvisation. It may happen that these phases appear 
disconnected to me. But it is also possible that l^ may recognise the 
unity of the improvisation, although it cannot be given to me, 
properly speaking, as object, since it is after all an improvisation. 
(This is the counterpart of what I was saying just now about the 
connection between JFact A, that the steps in building up the 
whole belong to the past, and JFjitt,J3 t jtha^^ 
object, is *&ivcu' to me.) Tb&tt&gnition which occurs in tfa&casfi of 

16 



the improvisation is already r^j^jdr^ofj^mcip^don^ that is, it 
can only take place if I am in some way 'on the inside*. 

But we can go a step further. It is not inconceivable that the 
participation contributes in some way to the improvisation itself. 
The more effective this participation is, the more actively shall I be 
involved in the improvisation (i.e. I shall be in a relation towards 
it of less pure receptivity), and so it will be more difficult for me, in 
a certain sense, to treat it as a totum simul. But this difficulty, this 
quasi-impossibility, will be connected much less with the actual 
structure of the whole, than with the way in which I am actively 
and personally involved in it. My situation in the whole is not, to 
tell the truth, of such a kind that I cannot detach myself in some 
sense from the function there assigned to me: but I must still find 
out what attitude I am to take up towards the decadhuncm itself] 
and this seems to me of the utmost importance. 

(A) It may happen that I decide jo disregard my detachment, 
and turn myself into a pure spectator. But this change of front 
carries with it the risk that the whole may also tend to appear to me 
as a pure spectacle, perhaps even a spectacle lacking in sense. Foi 
the intelligible force informing the improvisation could perhaps 
only be grasped by me in so far as I was actively associated with it, 
A kind of rift then appears, either between me and the total, or, 
still more serious, between me and myself. (This will be the case if] 
somehow dissociate myself, the pure spectator, from the immanent 
actions by which my participation was expressed: but these actions, 
thus isolated and robbed of their meaning, lose all significance; and 
their intrinsic nothingness may even be passed on, like a contagious 
disease, to the improvisation itself.) 

(B) It may appear, on the contrary, that I really think of my 
detachment as an interioriscd mode ofjgarticipation. If this is so, 1 
continue to be part of the system; my place has changed, and thai 
is all. 

B 17 M.B.H. 



March jtb 

It is a serious error, if I am not mistaken, to treat time as a mode 
of apprehension. For one is then forced to consider it also as the 
order according to which the subject apprehends himself, and he 
can only do this by breaking away from himself, as it were, and 
mentally severing the fundamental engagement which makes him 
what he is. (I take the word 'engagement* here to rejfresent both 
'involvement* and 'committal'.) 

This is the point of what I was trying to say yesterday afternoon, 
when I reflected that time is the very form of experimental activity. 
And from this point of view, to take up once more the metaphor of 
the absolute improvisation (a metaphor which seems to me in- 
exhaustible) one finds oneself thinking like this. To transcend time 
is not to raise ourselves, as we can do at any moment, to the actually 
empty idea of a totum simul empty because it remains outside us 
and thereby becomes in some way devitalised. By no means. It is 
rather to participate more and more actively in the creative intention 
that quickens the whole: in other words, to raise ourselves to levels 
from which the succession seems less and less given, levels from 
which a 'cinematographic* representation of events looks more and 
more inadequate, and ceases in the long run to be even possible. 

I think this is of the utmost importance. There, and perhaps only 
there, is the way open from creative evolution to a religious philo- 
sophy, but this way can only be taken through a concrete dialectic 
of participation. 1 

I believe also, though I cannot yet establish it, that we have here 
the basis for a Theory of Evil, which would maintain its reality 
without denying its contingency. 

The more we treat the world as a spectacle, the more unintelligible 

1 This remark, made in 1929, holds good for me even since the 
publication of M. Bergson's work, Les Deux Sources de la Morale et de la 
Religion (April, 1934.) 

18 



rhust it necessarily seem from a metaphysical point of view, because 
the relation then established between us and the world is an intrin- 
sically absurd one. Perhaps this is relevant to what I was writing 
the other day about interior opacity. 

My yesterday's notes have, I think, an important bearing on the 
problem of the genesis of the universe, or the finitude of the world 
in time. ID proportion as I treat the universe as object (detachment 
in the A -sense), I cannot help asking myself how this object was 
formed, how this 'set-up* started: and this implies the mental re- 
construction of a series of operations which has unfolded suc- 
cessively. T]ll^^J[%cj5.jar(<i) being thought of or treated as object 
and (b) possessing a jpast that can .be Deconstructed, are essentially 
connected. The simplest and clearest example is that of a person 
empirically given. 

But this, I repeat once more, presupposes the initial action by 
which I separate myself from the world, as I separate myself from 
the object which I consider in its different aspects. Now this act, 
while entirely legitimate or even necessary each time I consider 2 
particular thing, becomes illicit and even absurd as soon as I begir 
to consider the universe. I cannot really stand aside from the uni- 
verse, even in thought. Only by a meaningless pretence can I plaa 
myself at some vague point outside it, and from thence reproduce 
on a small scale the successive stages of its genesis. Nor can I plac< 
myself outside myself (a revealing parallel) and question mysel 
upon my own genesis, I mean of course the genesis of my non 
empirical, or metaphysical reality. The problem of the genesis of th< 
I and of the genesis of the universe are just onejind the same prob 
lem, or, more exactly, one and the same insoluble, the insolubility 
being bound up with my very position, my existence, and th< 
radical metaphysical fact of that existence. And here, I believe, w< 
can attain to an absolutely positive notion of eternity. The universe 
as such, not being thought of or able to be thought of as object, ha 

19 



strictly speaking no past: it entirely transcends what I called a 
'cinematographic* representation. And the same is true of myself: 
on a certain level I cannot fail to appear to myself as contemporary 
with the universe (coaevus universe), that is, as eternal. Only, of what 
order is this apprehension of oneVself as eternal? That is no doubt 
the most difficult point. And here, I think, we get back to what I 
was writing this morning. 

At bottom, the method is always the same; it is plumbing the 
depths of a given fundamental metaphysical situation of which it is 
inadequate to say 'it is mine', since it consists essentially in leinf me. 

I cannot help recording that this illumination of my thought is 
for me only the extension of the Other, the only Light. I have never 
known such happiness. 

I have been playing Brahms for a long time, piano sonatas that 
were new to me. They will always remind me of this unforgettable 
time. How can I keep this feeling of being entered, of being 
absolutely safe and also of being enfolded? 

March 8tb 

I am more and more struck by the difference between the two 
modes of detachment: the one is that of the spectator, the other of 
the saint. The detachment of the saint springs, as one might say, 
from the very core of reality; it completely excludes curiosity about 
the universe. This detachment is the highest form of participation. 
The detachment of the spectator is just the opposite, it is desertion, 
not only in thought but in act. Herein, I think, lies the kind of 
fatality which seems to weigh on all ancient philosophy it is essen- 
tially the philosophy of the spectator. 

But one thing must be noted: the belief that one can escape pure 
spectatorship by devotion to a practical science, which modifies the 
Real by its applications, is founded on a misconception. Here I 
vaguely see a very important line of thought, but confess that I 

20 



cannot quite clearly formulate it as yet. I should express it by saying 
that the modifications which such a science imposes on reality have 
no other result (metaphysically of course) than of making that 
science in some sense a stranger to reality. The word 'alienation* 
exactly expresses what I mean. 'I am not watching a show' I will 
repeat these words to myself every day. A fundamental spiritual fact. 

The interdependence of spiritual destinies, the plan of salvation; 
for me, that is the sublime and unique feature of Catholicism. 

I was just thinking a moment ago that the spectator-attitude 
corresponds to a form of lust; and more than that, it corresponds to 
the act by which the .subject appropriates the world for himself. 
And I now perceive the deep truth of Berulle's theocentrism. We 
are here to serve; yes, the idea of service, in every sense, must be 
thoroughly examined. 

Also perceived this morning, but still in a confused way, that 
there is profane knowledge and sacred knowledge (whereas previ- 
ously I have wrongly tended to assert that all knowledge was pro- 
fane. It isn't true, profane is a supremely informative word). Inquire 
on what conditions knowledge ceases to be profane. 

Incredible how thronged these days are spiritually! My life is 
being illuminated right into the depths of the past, and not my life 
only. 

Every time we give way to ourselves we may unawares be laying 
an additional limitation on ourselves, forging our own chain. That 
is the metaphysical justification for asceticism. I never understood 
that till now. 

Reality as mystery, intelligible solely as mystery. This also applies 
to myself. 

March gtb 

An important observation has just occurrred to my mind. I can 
no longer accept the idea, in any sense, of something beyond truth: 

21 



as a matter of fact the idea has made me uncomfortable for some 
time now. This gap between Truth and Being fills up, in a manner, 
of itself, the moment we really experience the presence of God. 
It is the half-truths which cease to deserve the name to the eye of 
faith. 

Faith, the force of invisible truths. I say this illuminating sentence 
over and over to myself but it only illuminates after the event. 

Also, I become conscious more and more of the part played in 
faith by the will. The thing is, to keep myself in a certain state 
analogous, on the human level, to the state of grace. In this sense, 
faith is essentially fidelity, and in the highest possible form. I 
realised this at once, with shattering clarity, on February 25th, and 
have known it ever since. 

March 11 tb 

A wholesome thought has come to me: let me write it down. 
Deep down beneath the critical attitude to the Gospel stories, is the 
implicit assertion 'It oughtn't to have happened like that*. In other 
words, we inwardly sketch the idea with really paralysing pre- 
sumption and folly of what revelation ought to have been like. And 
I. have a very strong suspicion that in this criticism there is always 
the idea 'this can't be true', so that of course one must be able to 
pick holes, find contradictions, etc. It seems to me that this laying 
down of kw by the individual consciousness ought to be rejected 
in principle. The Gospel words, in fact: 'become as little children.' 
Glorious words, but quite unintelligible to anyone who believes 
that there is an intrinsic value in maturity. I must go into all this 
and subject it to an infinitely more careful scrutiny. 

It is quite certain that from the moment that miracles are said to 
be impossible a priori, the arguments of a negative exegesis not only 
lose all their value, but become in essence suspect. 

I was thinking, too, that the credibility of miracles is positively 

22 



demonstrated by such tacts as the conversion ot Claudcl or Mari- 
tain. That these events can be believed in, is absolutely undeniable. 
Now nobody can think that these men believed without adequate 
facts to go upon. So taking their belief as a base, we must ask on 
what conditions it is possible, we must rise from the fact to the 
conditions on which it depends. This is the best and only way 
for genuirte religious reflection to take. 

March i2tb 

I have been feeling rather poorly this morning, and have made 
heavy weather of the pages on baptism in the catechism of the 
Council of Trent. This is all still very difficult for me to accept, but 
at the same time I have a strange feeling that a work is being done 
in me a feeling that each resistance I put up is being disintegrated 
or burnt away. Is this an illusion? I have seen it from outside for 
much too long. I must now get used to quite a different way of 
looking at it. It is not easy. I have a constant feeling of inward 
cauterisation. 

March 21 st 

I have just passed through a painful, dark time; a passage full of 
obstacles that were difficult to anticipate. The worst day, I think, 

was Sunday. On Monday evening, the long talk with M did 

me an enormous amount of good, and also my last meeting with 
the Abbe A . The real trouble was the teaching of the cate- 
chism, which I have literally had difficulty in assimilating, especi- 
ally at a time when the vital link with God was, if not broken, at 
least stretched beyond description. Today I feel I am recovering in 
the full sense of the word. The thing that most helps me is the desire 
not to be on the side of those who betrayed Christ, nor just with the 
blind men. It is that part of the Gospel which is the spring of 
inspiration in my present state. 

23 



March 2yd 

I was baptised this morning. My inward state was more than I 
had dared to hope for: no transports, but peaceful, balanced, 
and full of hope and faith. 

An idea came to me in the Luxembourg, and I will put it down 
at once. At bottom, space and time are in a way the forms of 
temptation. Pride and false humility combine in the act of recogni- 
sing our insignificance when compared with the infinity of space 
and time, for we are then claiming to put ourselves in imagination 
on the same plane as this pair of infinites, realised as objects of 
knowledge. Our beads are turned by such an approximation to God\ 
Return to the here and now, which recover an unparalled dignity 
and worth. This for later examination. Too tired tonight to write 
any more. 

April 12th 

I suspect that we have a mass of ideas here, and they will be hard 
to sort out; a tangled skein. 

I want to make a new and more thorough examination of the 
nature of the prejudice expressed by the words 'we have reached a 
point when we can no longer believe that . . .' etc. It contains a 
certain a priori notion of experience and growth (experience in the 
sense of growth, or growth in the sense of experience) which first 
needs to be drawn out. I was reflecting yesterday on the basic 
ambiguity of the idea of age when applied to mankind. Is the thing 
that has happened last the oldest of all things or the youngest? We 
vary, I think, or (more accurately) swing between the two views. At 
this present hour I see the Christian miracle, without qualification, 
as the absolute point at which youth is renewed. And perhaps the 
eternal and irremovable fountain of all the renewal of youth there 
can be. 



24 



May loth 

Have begun to philosophise again this afternoon, perhaps as a 
consequence of the wonderful Office for yesterday morning at the 
church in the Rue Monsieur, and also after my conversation with 

C , who came and talked to me about my letter in which I had 

poured out to him all the misery I feel when I am confronted by the 
Thomist claims. My thoughts turn on the ideas of salvation and 
perdition, in connection with an important passage in the Journal 
Metapbysique. Here are my main points. 

Only what is alive is capable of salvation or damnation what 
has a share in life, or is treated as having such a share. But above all, 
that which incorporates in itself existence and value. We must, 
however, go beyond these categories, and there perhaps we approxi- 
mate to Aristotelian theories. That which is saved is obviously that 
which keeps its form and is consequently, in a sense, withdrawn, 
if not from life, at least from becoming. And yet here is the diffi- 
culty only that which could be damned is capable of being saved: 
and this cannot therefore be either the worth, or the form itself. The 
form is eternally safe, it cannot even be threatened. The essential word 
is 'threatened': the idea of the 'threat* must be explored, and on all 
levels. On the biological level (or if we consider, for instance, a work 
of art, a picture or statue, from a purely material point of view) the 
idea of threat is comparatively clear. The gigantic ethical and meta- 
physical mistake of the present day is the refusal to recognise that 
the soul can also be threatened; or rather, this refusal comes down 
to the pure and simple denial of a foul. It may be noticed that in the 
realm of mind, or more accurately, of intelligence, we readily agree 
that the notion of a threat continues to mean something to us. Thus, 
we would all agree that certain mass-prejudices (national, social, 
etc.) can threaten the integrity of our judgment. But many people 
would be reluctant to extend the notion of integrity to cover 
personality unless they understood the word 'personality* in a 



purely biological sense, i.e. really just considering the working of a 
sort of machine. It is perfectly clear that, for a Christian, there could 
never be any question of considering the soul in this light, and 
perhaps it is here that the idea of normal function, or even health, 
ceases to be applicable. 

May nth 

It is clear that salvation cannot be thought of otherwise than as 
directly or indirectly connected with a certain desire (which may, 
indeed, not be the desire of the person to be saved; as in the case of 
a child or of the soul treated as a child). It is an important question 
whether it is not the same with regard to damnation. 

We are apt to think that, in the realm of life, loss or perdition just 
implies a sort of passivity: the only positive thing would be to put 
up an effective resistance against the forces of disintegration; but 
they, for their part, work mechanically. But is this the case? An 
essential problem, if we want to define the nature of evil. A sort of 
fundamental paradox seems to be written on the very heart of 
things, since death may be regarded either as the pure triumph of 
mechanical process, working automatically or, on the contrary, 
as the expression of a destructive will. This paradox appears once 
more in the realm of spirit, but there we are able to clear it up. In 
this realm, it is certainly possible to discover a will to destroy one's- 
self (or to destroy another, which comes in a sense to the same 
thing). Our problem will be to see how far we may consider the 
order of nature itself in the light of this evil will unveiled in the 
heart of man. 

June 12th 

The question of the priority of essence in relation to existence has 
always interested me. I think we can really regard it as a pure illu- 
sion, which arises because we oppose something merely conceived 

26 



(which we think justifies us in treating it as non-existent) to some- 
thing actualised. But in fact we have there simply two distinct 
modalities of being. Thought cannot go beyond existence; it can 
only in some degree abstract from it, and it is of the first importance 
that it should not be deceived by this act of abstraction. The jump 
to existence is something quite impossible to think of, and which 
does not even make sense. What we call 'the jump to existence* is 
really a kind of intra-existential transformation. That is the only 
way we can avoid idealism. We must say, then, that thought is 
inside existence, that it is a mode of existence which is privileged in 
being able to make abstraction from itself qua existence, and this for 
strictly limited purposes. It would not be untrue to say that thought 
involves in this sense a sort of lie, or rather a son of fundamental 
blindness; but the blindness disappears in proportion as it is 
accompanied by knowledge, which I take to mean the return to 
being. But such a return can only be made intelligible if the initial 
blindness has been explicitly recognised. In this regard certain 
kinds of Cartesianism, and above all some sorts of Fichteanism, 
seem to me the most serious errors of which any metaphysic has been 
guilty. It is impossible to exaggerate how much better the formula 
e s denkt in mir is than cogito trgo sum, which lets us in for pure subject- 
ivism. The 'I think* is not the spring of inspiration. Far from it, it 
actually dams the flow. 1 

June 26th 

I feel that I am today rid of whatever traces of idealism remained 
in my philosophy. I feel exorcised (by the influence of Father 
Garrigou-Lagrange's book on God, though it is very far from 
satisfying me completely). 

I 1 would not today unhesitatingly subscribe to these sweeping asser- 
tions. But I thought it right to record them, as they bear on that stage of 
my philosophical journey when I made my greatest effort to break with 
every form of idealism, whatever it might be. (April, 1934.) 

V? 



The order of the problems seems to me to be as follows. Does 
our knowledge of particular things come to bear on the things 
themselves or on their Ideas? Impossible not to adopt the realist 
solution. Hence we pass to the problem of Being in itself. A blind- 
fold knowledge of Being in general is implied in all particular 
knowledge. But here, take care in what sense we use the words 
'Being in general*. Obviously there is no question of Being 
emptied of its individual characteristics. I should express myself 
better if I said that since all knowledge concerns the thing and not 
the Idea of the thing the Idea not being an object in itself and 
being incapable of conversion into an object except by a subsequent 
thought-process of doubtful validity it implies that we are related 
to Being. The sense of these last words must be thoroughly explored. 

June 28tb 

The fact that I cannot possibly deny the principle of identity, 
except in vertis, at once prevents me from denying Being and also 
from holding an aloof attitude tantamount to admitting that 'there 
may be Being, or again there may not*. And, what is more, Being 
cannot by definition be put into the category of mere possibles. On 
the one hand, it is out of the question to think it contains a logical 
impossibility; on the other, we cannot treat it as an empirical possi- 
bility. Either there is not and cannot be experience of Being, or else 
this experience is in fact vouchsafed to us. But we cannot even con- 
ceive of a more privileged position than our own, in which we 
could affirm what our experience, as it now exists, does not let us 
affirm at present. Such a situation would be, at best, that of a being 
who saw, but was ipso facto beyond affirmation. The last refuge now 
possible for the opponent of ontology is to deny that an uncondi- 
tional affirmation of Being is possible; in short, to take up his 
quarters in a relativist pluralism which asserts beings or lists of 
realities, but does not pronounce on their unity. But still, either 

28 



words have no sense, or he is none the less implicitly asserting a 
unity which enwraps them. He will then have to take refuge in 
pure nominalism; that, I think, is the only cover left to him. He 
will have to deny that there is even an idea, much less a reality, 
corresponding to the word 'Being*. From this point of view, the 
principle of identity will be treated just as a 'rule of the game of 
thought*, and thought itself will be left radically separated from 
reality. From pure nominalism we slide into pure idealism. It is a 
dangerously slippery path, for idealism cannot reduce an idea to a 
symbol; it must see in it at least an act of the mind. And that intro- 
duces a new series of difficulties. 

July 17 tb 

After reading Fr. Garrigou-Lagrange, I should like to make my 
position clear on the legitimacy of the classic proofs of the existence 
of God. I must honestly admit that under the persistent influence of 
idealism, I have been continually evading the ontological problem, 
properly so called. I have always, I admit, had the deepest reluc- 
tance to think according to the category of being: can I justify this 
reluctance to myself? I have really grave doubts of this. Pure agnosti- 
cism, i.e. a completely open mind about the affirmation of being, 
today appears to me untenable. On the other hand, I cannot take 
refuge in the notion that the category of being is in itself lacking in 
validity. Thought is betraying itself, and ignoring its own demands 
if it claims to substitute the order of value for the order of being, and 
at the same time is condemning itself to a state of most suspicious 
ambiguity in face of the given, even where it is its real business to 
grasp and define this given. On the other hand, can I maintain that 
the affirmation 'Being is\ is despite appearances the mere formal 
enunciation of a 'rule of the game* which thought must observe in 
order merely to work? To put it another way, is it a mere hypotheti- 
cal inference equivalent to saying that if I assert a certain content, 

29 



this assertion implies itself and consequently excludes those asser- 
tions which do not agree with it? 

When I affirm that A is A 9 this means in idealist language that 
my thought, in asserting A, commits itself in a certain manner to 
an yl-position; but this version does not really represent what I, in 
fact, think when I assume the identity of A with itself. This 
identity, for me, is really the condition of all possible structure 
(logical or real this is not the place to take account of the distinc- 
tion). We could not, in fact, deny the principle of identity without 
denying that thought can have a bearing on anything. We should 
be holding that, in proportion as I think anything, I cease to think 
because my thought becomes the slave of a content which inhibits 
or even annuls it. We could imagine a Heracleitanism or a hyper- 
Bergsonism which would go as far as that. Only the question 
would then be, whether this thought, which was not the thought 
of something, would still be a thought, or whether it would be lost 
in a sort of dream of itself. For my own part, I am convinced that 
the second alternative is the true one; and accordingly we may 
wonder whether I myself can think of myself (as thinking) without 
converting this 'me* thought of, into something which is nothing, 
and which is thus a mere contradiction. But here I join forces with 
Thomism or at least with what I understand to be Thomism. 
Thought, far from being a relation with itself, is on the contrary 
essentially a self-transcendence. So the possibility of the realist 
definition of truth is implied in the very nature of thought. Thought 
turns towards the Other, it is the pursuit of the Other. The whole 
riddle is to discover whether this Other is Being. I must here note 
that it may be important to refrain from the use of the term 'con- 
tent', because of its idealist overtones. It is abundantly clear to me 
that access to objectivity, in the sense in which it is a stumbling- 
block to a certain type of mind, must either be posited from the 
beginning or remain for ever unattainable. 

30 



July i8th 

Have been reflecting much on the difference between thinking (a 
thought) and thinking 0/(an object). Thinking is recognising (or 
building, or isolating) a structure: thinking of is something quite 
different. German helps here: denken, an ttwas denken t andenken, 
Andacbt. One thinks ofz being or even an event, past or to come. I am 
not sure if one can think of God in the same sense that we can think 
of the incarnate Christ in any case one can only do so on condi- 
tion that one does not treat God as structure. 

It would be risky, or at least premature, to deny all ontological 
value to this order or structure and there I may have been very 
rash. All this must be thought out far more deeply. It is obvious 
that I may treat even an individual person as an object of thought 
(I make this transposition when I move from the Thou to the He). 

Find out if God as structure is implied in all particular structures. 

July igtb 

In brief, thinking docs not come to bear on anything but essences. 
Note that depersonalisation, while perfectly allowable in this case, 
is impossible in the order of thinking of. Only a certain person can 
think of* certain being or a certain thing. This is very important. 

Note, on the other hand, that the more we fill in the context, the 
more we slide from just thinking to thinking of. This is important in 
order to understand in what sense the infinite is involved in the fact 
of thinking (or conceiving) the individual as essence. 

Another point: we must try to understand how it is that to pray 
to God is without any question the only way to think of God, or 
more accurately, a sort of equivalent raised to a higher power of the 
action which would, on a lower plane, be thinking of someone. 
When I think of a finite being, I restore, in a manner, between him 
and myself, a community, an intimacy, a with (to put it crudely) 
which might seem to have been broken (I noticed this these last few 



days in thinking ol school Inends 1 had tost sight otj. To ask 
myself how I can think of God is to enquire in what sense I can be 
with Him. Quite obviously there is no question of such co-existence 
as that which may bind me to a fellow-creature. And yet, do not 
let us forget that there is already, in the fact of thinking of someone, an 
active denying of space, that is, of the most material and also most 
illusory character of the 'with'. Denying of space denying of death 
death being in a sense the triumph, and the deepest expression, of 
such separation as can be realised in space. What is a dead man? 
A man who is no longer even elsewhere, no longer anywhere. But 
thought about him is the active denial of his extinction (consider 
the metaphysical value of memory, or even, in a sense, of history). 
We might here examine the strange idea, commonly held, that the 
absent or dead friend is 'no longer anywhere', but just 'in me'; at 
bottom a belief in a sort of photograph which outlives the original, 
a photograph which is undeveloped, fleeting, fading but a 
photograph none the less. ('He has gone away, but I have his 
photograph.') But here again, we are aware of the complete evasion 
of the spontaneous assertions of consciousness. When I think of 
him, it is himself I am thinking of, and the 'photograph' is just a 
sort of mediating element, a point d'appui (which varies, moreover, 
according to the powers of memory in different individuals). I 
might express this by saying that Andenken is deeply magical; that it 
reaches Being itself past those intermediaries we call psychological 
(whose ontological nature remains, anyhow, impenetrable for us). 
The idealist, Proustian notion, that this Being is a pure construc- 
tion, should be treated as it deserves. No account can be given of it 
if it is reduced to a mere imaginative synthesis. But at the same time 
this metaphysical act which puts me in touch with a being with 
Being will always show an aspect corresponding to the activity of 
thought taken as construction or as recognition. 



July jotb 

Result of a morning's thought: Given a certain structure, whether 
spatial, temporal, or spado-temporal (it is surely very important to 
get to the bottom of the notion of temporal structure, which Berg- 
son seems to me to have scamped or evaded: a certain tune, a 
certain life) given this structure, it is obvious that by the very fact 
that it is such a structure, it is 'a certain 9 structure and not 'a certain 
other one 9 . Here the principle of identity takes on its full signifi- 
cance. But should we not deduce from this that in proportion as 
the structure loses its clear outlines, and more nearly approaches the 
aircipov, the principle will correspondingly lose its significance? 
But in that case immensely important problems arise. Can I say 
with the Thomists that the principle of identity forces me to assert 
Being? I cannot do so unless I am sure that Being is distinguishable 
from the a7ra/xn>; in other words, in order not to be forced to admit 
that the principle of identity is only valid in the realm of the finite, 
I must be able to distinguish the aireipov from the infinite, which 
ancient philosophy did not do and even expressly refused to do. 
Otherwise, all I can say will be that the principle of identity is in- 
applicable to the arreipov for the simple reason that the airipov is 
not thinkable: to put it differently, the principle of identity only 
ceases to apply at the point where thought itself can no longer work. 
So there is a series of possibilities to be distinguished: 

(A) We can make the principle of identity the principle of the 
finite world (finite being equated with determinate), and we can 
admit the possibility (to be considered more closely) of a transcen- 
dent thought which would overleap the finite world and not be 
subject to the principle of identity. 

() We could, again, deny the above possibility; this would be 
tantamount to admitting that there is no thought except in the 
finite order (relativism under all its shapes). This denial would 
imply the postulate that the indeterminate and the infinite were one. 

c 33 M.B.H. 



(C) Finally, we could refuse to accept such a hypothesis, and so 
could separate the infinite and the indeterminate; in other 'words, 
conceive or even affirm the existence of an absolute structure which 
would be at the same time an absolute life, that is, an ens realissimum. 
This would be equivalent to saying that the principle of identity 
accompanies the exercise of thought throughout, but that thought 
can, without leaving the determinate, rise to the notion of a positive 
infinite. The affirmation * Being is can only be rejected under hypo- 
thesis B, i.e. if Being, considered as aTretpov, as essentially 'not 
such-and-such*, is found by this very definition to be outside the 
operation of a principle which is only valid in the realm of the 

ich-and-such', the realm of the qualified. In the realm of what I 
call particular structures, I am always in the sphere of the hypo- 
thetical. Supposing S is given me in certain conditions, which, how- 
ever, remain to be fixed (we must not forget that appearances are also 
given to me, and yet do not exist), I may then affirm that 'it is'; or 
again 'if it is, it is*. A formula which is far from clear and far from 
satisfactory. I can no longer see and shall have to stop. 

July 31 st 

Can we treat Being as an element of structure, as a determination 
belonging or not to a certain type of structure? It seems quite 
obvious to me that we cannot; this was the sense in which Kant 
was right to deny that Being was a predicate. But then, must we say 
that Being is a subject must we identify Seyn and the Seyende? 

I can get no further along those lines today, I don't know why. 

We must rid ourselves once and for all of the notion, or pseudo- 
notion, of a refraction of the real in passing through a certain 
medium, the appearance being this refracted reality. Whatever is the 
proper way of conceiving the ideal (in the sense of mere ideal), we 
cannot picture it to ourselves as a refracting medium, if only for 
the reason that the 'ontological status 9 of such a medium is im- 

34 



possible to fix, it remains, indeed, hanging between being and not- 
being. It is here that the principle of the excluded middle takes on 
its full meaning, when it is supplemented by the idea of degrees or 
spheres of reality. We are involved in Being, and it is not in our 
power to leave it: more simply, we are, and our whole inquiry is just 
how to place ourselves in relation to plenary Reality. 

I think I noticed something of importance yesterday. Pure pheno- 
menaliim being contradictory and even meaningless, the denial of 
ontology must come back to alternative B, according to which 
Being is the aircipov I will not press the point that to express it 
thus is still to use the language of definition. The opponent of onto- 
logy will say that he does not allow himself to leave the realm of the 
'such-and-such*. And that is the point on which we must manage 
to take a definite line. I see it something like this: fragmentation of 
the Real ('this exists, that exists', etc.), if it is not to lead to the un- 
thinkable, that is to say to a sort of transposed atomism, implies as a 
balancing factor the idealist assertion of the unity of thought, and 
we shall have to look more deeply into the nature of that unity. I 
think, though I cannot prove it yet, that if we admit that thought is 
essentially access to Being, transitus, we can no longer be content 
with a piecemeal realism. Return to this later. 

To say 'A is, B is, etc., but I cannot assert that Being is 9 seems to 
me equivalent to saying 'A participates in Being, B participates in 
Being, etc., but this Being in which they participate is not, perhaps, 
anything of which we can say that it is\ It is obvious that such a 
hypothesis is in contradiction to the principle of identity, since it is 
equivalent to the admission that perhaps (but the perhaps makes no 
difference) Being does not exist. But is not this treating Being in the 
way we treat a quality such as colour, hardness, etc.? This surface is 
coloured, so is this, but I cannot therefore conclude that colour 
exists. But notice that the colour appears essentially as an element of 
ts 1 , or if you like, in my terms, of a structure. But this is obvi- 

35 



ously inconceivable for Being; we cannot suppose for a second that 
a sort of mixture can be made of Being and something else. It really 
looks as if we should have to be more Eleatic than Plato, and say 
that strictly speaking non-being does not and cannot exist. Perhaps 
this is the same as saying that the Aristotelian-Thomist distinction 
between category and transcendental is rightly grounded, and this is 
important. But then we must also recognise that the very term 
'participation' is ambiguous, and so even dangerous, for its use 
carries an inevitable risk of starting a confusion between Being and 
predicates or attributes. 1 

The sort of mistrust aroused by ontology would, then, be due 
to the fact that the ontologist seems to treat as a quality, and, I would 
add, hypostatise something which seems to us to be the supremely 
unqualified. It seems to follow that he is condemned to swing be- 
tween a truism (that which is, exists) and a paralogism which 
would consist in attributing Beingto the a-rreipov (cf. my yesterday's 
notes). Does not the solution lie in positing the omnipresence of 
Being, and what I might (perhaps improperly) call the immanence 
of thought in Being, that is to say, co ipso the transcendence of Being 
over thought? 

August $tb 

I have not yet quite managed to clear up the puzzle I sketched 
at the end of my notes for the sist. To assert the immanence of 
thought in Being is to recognise with the realists that thought, as 
soon as it is there, refers to something which transcends it and 
which it cannot claim to reabsorb into itself without betraying its 
true nature. This reference is indeed implied in the phenomenolo- 
gist idea ofMcincn or Bcdeutcn. For someone whose formative train- 
ing has been idealist, this will certainly come as a great shock. He 
will ask how this forbidden reabsorption can be avoided, how I can 
1 This seems to me today somewhat questionable. (April, 1934.) 

56 



help making the act of synthesis which contains in itself, and is at the 
same time more than, the idea and the ideatum. But I will ask in 
my turn whether this act of synthesis, supposing it is possible, does 
not overstep the very bounds of discursive thought. There is a 
whole bag of tricks here, and we cannot be too wary of them. 

I should like to see how far these remarks allow me to clear up 
the notion of participation in Being. 

The uneasiness I feel on these subjects is partly due to my old 
difficulty in seeing the relation between being and existing. It seems 
obvious to me that existing is a certain way of being; we shall have 
to see whether it is the only one. Perhaps something could be with- 
out existing. 1 But I regard it as axiomatic to say that the inverse is 
not possible, except by an indefensible juggling with words. On 
these assumptions, I shall be able to study, with a few precautions, 
the problem of participation in Being seen in an existential example. 
What I said about the impossibility of a fitf-is obviously applies 
here; I cannot possibly say that a certain object or a certain being, so 
far as it exists, participates in the quality of existence, and ceases to 
participate in it when it ceases to exist. 2 

Perhaps the real origin of the mistake is this. (See my notes of 
July I yth, 1 8th, and I9th.) I confuse 'thinking' and 'thinking of* 
a confusion which works in favour of the first mode. Thence I pro- 
ceed to treat existence, which comes under the second mode, as if it 
were a quality; if it were, it would fall under the jurisdiction of the 
first mode. This is not yet quite clear in my mind. I think 0/a thing, 
o/a person, and existence is here tied to this act of thinking of it or 
him; I think of them as existents, even in cases where I am denying 

1 The simplest example of this which occurs to me is that of the past, 
which no longer exists, and yet I cannot say purely and simply that it 
is not. 

2 We must ask ourselves whether no-longer-being is not, to a certain 
type of popular thought, being-lost-sight-of, and so returning to the 

v. This is worth looking into. 

37 



that they exist. But if I isolate existence from them, I think it, that is, 
I treat it as an essence or rather, to be more exact, as a pseudo- 
essence. Does not this come to the same thing as saying that there is 
no idea of existence in the strict sense of the term? and this because 
existence is the limit, or, if you will, the axis of reference for thought 
itself? 

But the difficulty is unchanged: is it not after all because I think 
existence in a certain manner, and so because I form a certain idea 
of it, that I can deny that this idea is possible? Antinomy. 

August $tb 

I do really assert that thought is made for being as the eye is made 
for light (a Thomist formula). But this is a dangerous way of 
talking, as it forces us to ask whether thought itself is. Here an act of 
thought reflecting on itself may help us. I think, therefore, being is, 
since my thought demands being; it does not contain it analytically, 
but refers to it. It is very difficult to get past this stage. There is a 
sense in which I only think in so far as I am not (Valery?), that is, 
there is a kind of space between me and being. But it is difficult to 
see just what this means. In any case, I do notice a close kinship 
between thought and desire. 1 Clearly in the two cases 'good* and 
'being* play equivalent parts. All thought transcends the immedi- 
ate. The pure immediate excludes thought, as it also excludes desire. 
But this transcendence implies a magnetisation, and even a teleology. 

No date 

The growing consciousness of our need for ontology is surely 
one of the most striking features of present-day thought; not only 

I 1 wonder if this should not be corrected in the light of remarks 
offered later on the opposition between desire on the one hand and will 
and hope on the other. An analysis of thought might well make possible 
the discovery of an opposition or a hierarchy in it which would be 
completely analogous with this. 

38 



in its technically metaphysical expressions, but also on levels where 
the idea is only grasped through a whole world of images, which it 
conjures up but cannot ever assimilate or master. No doubt we can, 
strictly speaking, see in this just a simple fact which lies in the 
province of purely empirical explanations, and is perhaps the busi- 
ness of a psycho-analysis tinged with sociology. It is extremely easy 
and perhaps tempting for a certain type of mind to say that this 
need to affirm Being springs from a vital instinct, scarcely subli- 
mated, reacting in its characteristic way to post-war pessimism. 
There we have a theme, I will not say for meditation, but for 
rhetorical elaboration, the fertility of which is only equalled by its 
essential insignificance. The question is really just this and most 
of our contemporaries do not even think of asking it up to what 
point does explanation actually possess the power to eliminate the 
thing explained, or at the very least to guarantee its harmlessness? 
for all belief, perhaps even all affirmation as such, has in the eye of 
the pure rationalist a peculiarly toxic character. I may be wrong, 
but it seems to me that this way of conceiving explanation, i.e. 
treating it quite literally as exorcism, starts from an unhealthy 
condition of the human mind, a condition contracted at a compara- 
tively recent date under the sway of the influence exerted by positive 
science. To return to the example which was the starting-point of 
these remarks; is it not quite evident that the judgment of value, or, 
more precisely, the metaphysical appreciation which is called for by 
the ontological demand itself, cannot possibly depend in any way 
on the empirical conditions in which our experience, analysed 
more or less carefully, allows us to recognise the insistence and nature 
of this demand? It is perfectly possible that what we call the normal 
state (a term, by the way, quite void of meaning) of a human being 
a state certainly implying some minimum of comfort and 
security is by no means the most favourable for the inward alert- 
ness which a really profound metaphysical investigation both 

39 



arouses and requires. Whatever the possible results of an enquiry 
into what might be called the empirical diet of speculative thought, 
the barest consideration gives the lie to the belittling claims of 
psycho-pathology, whose pretensions rest almost entirely on a mis- 
taken assumption about the content of knowledge, and about the 
nature of the facts which enable our consciousness to apprehend it. 
The excellent criticism to which such a man as Chesterton has 
subjected the notion of mental health, with all the adulterated neo- 
paganism that goes with it, strikes here with its full weight. So we 
must not hesitate for a second to recognise that the present-day 
rebirth of ontology is, beyond doubt, dictated by a singularly strong 
and even obsessive sense of the threat which weighs on mankind 
a threat, alas! of which it is all too easy to observe and record con- 
crete examples. But this observation is altogether lacking in really 
fertile inspiration. 1 

No date 

My life and I. 

Can I 'think* my life? When I come to grips with the sense of 
these two words 'my life*, it seems that all meaning has deserted 
them. There is my past: there is also the feeling of a pulsating Now. 
But is all this really my life? My past, in so far as I consider it, 
ceases to be my past. 

1 Or rather, it does not yield us an argument for the belittling of the 
ontological hunger itself. Still, we ought to ask whether a sharp aware- 
ness of the universal threat is not really a normal thing? and by no means 
just something corresponding to the accidental disturbance of an order 
which is in principle stable or stabilised (as some have thought). It would 
then follow that the ontological need is emphasised, or sharpened, when- 
ever a man's circumstances show up more clearly that state of danger 
which is an integral part of his being. This would no doubt agree with 
the line of thought running from Kierkegaard to Heidegger. (April, 

I934-) 

40 



No date 

Being as the place of fidelity. 

How is it that this formula arising in my mind, at a given 
moment of time, has for me the inexhaustible inspiration of a 
musical theme? 

Access to ontology. 

Betrayal as evil in itself. 

November 6th 

How can I promise commit my future? A metaphysical prob- 
lem. All committal is partly unconditional, that is to say, it is of its 
essence to imply that we shall disregard some variable elements of 
the situation which is the basis of our entering the committal. For 

instance, I promise to go and see N tomorrow. At the basii of 

this committal, there may be present (a) my desire at the moment 
to give him pleasure; (i) the fact that nothing else is attracting me 
at the moment. But it is quite possible that tomorrow, i.e. at the time 
when I fulfil my commitment, I shall no longer have the desire, and 
shall instead be attracted by this interest or that, which I never 
dreamed of when I committed myself. I can by no means commit 
myself to the continued experience of the desire, or not to be 
attracted if the rival opportunity arises. In fact, there would be a 
tincture of deceit in extending my commitment to cover my own 
feelings on the subject. That would be an affirmation, a claim, to 
which reality (viz. my reality) might be found to give the lie. There 
is a supremely important distinction to be made between the com- 
mittal in itself and an affirmation not implied by it which is 
concerned with the future; we must even say that it could not 
imply it without at the same time becoming invalid. For it would 
then become conditional: 'Suppose I still feel a desire tomorrow 
to come and see you, you may depend on me.' One sees at once 
where the commitment is partly unconditional: 'whatever my state 

4i 



of mind, whatever my temper (up to a point I cannot foresee them), 
I will come and see you tomorrow/ A kind of division takes place 
in me: on the one side, a ^ye/xoWov which asserts its identity 
across time and plays the role of the guaranteeing power; on the other 
side, a conglomerate of elements of myself which the r\y^oviKov % 
with which I identify myself, makes it its business to control. 

There is naturally an outer circle which is properly that of TOJV 
OVK TT* fjLoi. For instance, if my state of health prevents me from 
going out, I shall not come. Clearly a careful analysis here would 
show that there was a sort of shading-offfrom what depends on me 
to what does not depend on me. But I must be permitted to harden 
the lines to some extent. No act of committal, then, is possible 
except for a being who can be distinguished from his own momen- 
tary situation and who recognises this difference between himself and 
his situation and consequently treats himself as somehow transcend- 
ing his own life-process, and answers for himself. It is further 
evident that in the exercise of this faculty of answering for one's 
behaviour, the less twisted and inwardly discordant the life-process 
which we have to discount, the easier will our task be. Add to this 
that if I know myself, I shall less easily commit myself in a case 
where I am conscious of my own instability. But be that as it may, 
a consistent phenomenalism, supposing we could think it, asserting 
that the ego coincided with its immediate present, ought to exclude 
even the possibility of a commitment; for indeed, how could I 
bind a someone else, a someone whom, by definition, I cannot 
know because he does not yet exist? 

The problem of commitment logically comes before that of 
fidelity; for in a sense I cannot be faithful except to my own com- 
mitment, that is, it would seem, to myself. Must we then say that all 
fidelity is fidelity to one's-self ? and what should we understand that 
to mean? Surely it would be possible to distinguish a hierarchy of 
commitments, in order to elucidate this problem? Are not some 

42 



commitments in a way essentially conditional, so that I cannot 
unconditionalise them except by making a presumption which is in 
itself impermissible? e.g. a commitment which depends on an 
opinion (literary, political, etc.). It is clear on the one hand that I 
cannot guarantee that my opinion (on Victor Hugo, socialism, 
etc.) will remain unchanged; and on the other hand it would be 
quite ridiculous to commit myself to a future course of action in 
conformity with an opinion which may cease to be mine. Obvi- 
ously my human aesthetic experience in such realms may undergo 
almost unpredictable changes. We must see, then, whether there 
exist commitments which can be recognised as transcending what- 
ever experience may add to us. To pass on to the problem of 
fidelity pledged to a person: it is clear that experience may influence 
not only the opinion I form of that person, but also my knowledge 
of him and the feelings I have about him. Here we are not merely 
talking about a desire which can cease to exist, but also of a 
sympathy which can be thrown off for antipathy or hostility. 

But then, in what sense can I sanely pledge myself to be faithful 
to him? Is it not just as ridiculous as pledging myself to vote for the 
Conservative candidate if I become a Socialist before polling-day? 
If there is a difference, where does it lie? A fundamental problem. 
We have seen at the beginning of our analysis that there can be no 
act of commitment unless some identity has been posited, even if it 
is only posited implicitly. But we must not take our stand upon 
abstractions. The identity in question cannot be simply abstract; 
it is the identity of a certain direction of will. The more abstract 
this will is, the more I become the prisoner of a form, and build a 
wall up between myself and life. It is quite different when there is, 
at the root of the commitment, a fundamental apprehension; but 
surely it is clear that this must be of a religious kind. This is what 
I must consider. In any case, this apprehension must be directed 
towards Being or towards a human being. 

43 



November jtb 

There is certainly a very serious problem here. Can I commit 
myself to feeling tomorrow what I feel today? Surely not. Can I 
commit myself to behaving tomorrow in accordance with my 
feelings of today, which will not be my feelings of tomorrow? 
Again, surely not. But then must we admit that in swearing 
fidelity to a person, I am going beyond the bounds of all legitimate 
commitment, i.e. commitment which corresponds to my nature? 
There is, of course, one solution: to say that in any case I must 
honour my word and that I consequently create the motive for 
fulfilment by the very act of making the commitment. Is that an 
answer I can be content with? Cannot I reply that if today I have 
the desire to keep my word, tomorrow that desire may be found 
infinitely weaker, and that for a score of reasons? By what right is it 
asserted as a constant? I cannot so assert it, in any case, unless I 
treat the desire as more than a simple state. So I should have to 
distinguish the fact of my feeling from the act of recognising obliga- 
tion; and admit that this recognition is independent of the feelings 
which may or may not accompany it. Tomorrow, perhaps, I shall 
not feel inclined to keep my word, but I shall know I am bound to 
do so. But here again we must beware of formalism and of the 
dangers of mere abstraction. Might not somebody point out that I 
am simplifying the problem by giving the impression of thinking 
that nothing binds me but myself? There is the other party too, and 
the fear of the other party's reactions to my not keeping my word. 
I think, however, that we are within our rights in discounting this 
element. There may be cases where my failure to keep my word is 
only known to myself. The problem may be restated: what is the 
nature of this bond (implied in the action of swearing I will, etc.)? 
To recognise one's obligation is to establish a fact, if you like, but 
what fact? I have put my signature to this; I am obliged to honour 
it I establish that it is indeed my signature. Must we say that I am 

44 



translating into a purely personal realm something which makes no 
real sense except in the social order? 

I think we must leave entirely aside such pseudo-explanations: 
they have no power except to confuse the issue. But then why do I 
consider that I am bound to honour my signature? Mainly, it is 
clear, so that the worth of this signature may be safeguarded. It 
is rendered worthless by the very act of repudiating it in a particular 
instance, (whatever my desire to let this particular case stand as an 
exception). But after all, surely there is an illusion here, which I 
have every interest in exposing. Socially, no doubt, I lay myself 
open to painful sanctions if I fail my commitments. But surely it is 
only to my interest to keep them strictly to the extent I am forced 
to do so. So why not reduce the part played in my life by religh to 
a minimum? See what this implies (in any case it reduces the part 
of the unconditional practically to disappearing point). 

Examine how far I have the right to bind myself: this touches on 
the question approached yesterday. A certain 'philosophy of 
becoming* refuses me this right. This is the most serious problem. 

I have no right to enter upon a commitment which it will be 
materially impossible for me to keep (or rather which I should 
know to be so if I were perfectly sincere). Frivolity. 

But is there a single commitment which cannot be regarded as 
frivolously entered upon? Compare the cheque. I know what my 
realisable assets are; my commitments are only legitimate or valid in 
so far as they refer to sums which are, at the most, equal to these 
assets. Only here we are in a realm where this comparison does not 
apply: I made that clear at the start when I spoke of the un- 
conditional element. 

I see it like this. In the end there must be an absolute commitment, 
entered upon by the whole of myself, or at least by something real in 
myself which could not be repudiated without repudiating the 
whole and which would be addressed to the whole of Being and 



would be made in the presence of that whole. That is faith. 
Obviously, repudiation is still a possibility here, but cannot be 
justified by a change in the subject or object; it can only be 
explained by a/a//. An idea to work out. 

Another thing that I notice is this. There is no commitment 
purely from my own side; it always implies that the other being 
has a hold over me. All commitment is a response. A one-sided 
commitment would not only be rash but could be blamed as 
pride. 

The notion of pride, indeed, pkys a part of paramount impor- 
tance in this discussion. It seems to me that it is essential to show 
that pride cannot be the principle upon which fidelity rests. As I see 
it, and despite appearances to the contrary, fidelity is never fidelity 
to oneVself, but is referred to what I called the hold the other being 
has over us. But I am putting these points in a topsy-turvy way. 
I must get some order and ckrity into my scattered ideas. Perhaps 
examples would help. The key-point is that we must take account, 
when we are considering if a committal is valid, of the state of mind 
of the person who is entering upon it (e.g. the promise of a drunk- 
ard). The mind must be compos sui and declare itself to be such in 
its own judgment (without reserving to itself the possibility of after- 
wards alleging that it was wrong). Here then we have a judgment 
of the deepest importance, lying at the root of the commitment. 
But it does not at all discount the hold which a reality exercises 
over us; on the contrary, this bold is at the base of the judgment 
itself; the judgment simply prolongs and sanctions an apprehension. 

November 8tb 

The love or respect for truth reduced to fidelity. A mistake, 
which consists in treating it as the will for self-consistency (cf. the 
connection between pride and fidelity which is only pledged to 
itself). In other words, beware of defining intelligence by a sort of 

46 



formal identity. There must be a bold on the real at the root of 
intelligence. Am enormously struck by this correlation. 1 

Perhaps we should also show how far fidelity is linked up with a 
fundamental ignorance of the future. A way of transcending time 
in virtue of the very fact that it is absolutely real for us. In swearing 
fidelity to a person, I do not know what future awaits us or even, 
in a sense, what person he will be tomorrow; the very fact of my 
not knowing is what gives worth and weight to my promise. There 
is no question of response to something which is, absolutely speak- 
ing, ^/W; and the essential of a being is just that not being 'given* 
either to another or himself. There is something essential here, 
which defines spirituality (as opposed to the relation contained in 
desire, a relation which, if not physical, is at least actual. But we 
cannot reduce ourselves to things of the moment, or at least we are 
no more than function if we are momentarily considered). 

No date 

I promised C the other day that I would come back to the 

nursing home where he his been dying for weeks, and see him 
again. This promise seemed to me, when I made it, to spring from 
the inmost depths of my being. A promise moved by a wave of 
pity: he is doomed, he knows it, he knows I know it. Several days 
have gone by since my visit. The circumstances which dictated my 
promise are unchanged; I have no room for self-deception about 
that. I should be able to say yes, I even dare assert that he still 
inspires the same compassion in me. How could I justify a change 
in the state of my feelings, since nothing has happened since which 
could have the power to alter them? And yet I must in honesty 
admit that the pity I felt the other day, is today no more than a 
theoretical pity. I still judge that he is unhappy and that it is right 

1 Think what it would be like to live by penny numbers! It would be 
dreaming one's life away. It would be life without reality. 

47 



to be sorry for him, but this is a judgment I should not have 
dreamed of formulating the other day. There was no need. My 
whole being was concentrated into an irresistible impulse towards 
him, a wild longing to help him, to show him that I was on his side, 
that his sufferings were mine. I have to recognise that this impulse no 
longer exists, and it is no longer in my power to do more than 
imitate it by a pretence which some part of me refuses to swallow. 

All that I can do is to observe that C is unhappy and alone and 

that I cannot let him down; also, I have promised to come back; my 
signature is at the foot of the bond and the bond is in his possession. 

The silence I feel within me is strangely different from that other 
cry of pity from the heart; yet it docs not seem to me altogether 
mysterious. I can find a good enough explanation for it in myself 
and the rhythm of my moods. But what is the good? Proust was 
right: we are not at our own disposal. There is a part of our being 
to which strange, perhaps not altogether conceivable, conditions 
give us sudden access; the key is in our hands for a second; and a 
few minutes later the door is shut again and the key disappears. 
I must accept this fact with shame and sorrow. 

But this commitment that I took upon myself the other day 
surely it rested upon my ignoring, and wrongly ignoring, these 
fluctuations and interruptions in my states? Surely it was rather 
presumptuous of me to assert that, on such-and-such a day in the 
future, I should still feel the same compassion which pierced me 
to the heart when I stood by the sick bed? Or did I really make no 
such claim at the time, did I really mean that a certain material 
fact my visit would take place after a certain interval? What 
shall I answer? I must not accept this alternative. I did not ask 
myself whether the feeling that impelled me towards him was going 
to die down like a fountain or the shape of a melody. A fortiori 
I could not commit myself to feeling tomorrow as I did yesterday. 

But suppose I leave aside whatever I was conscious of at that 

48 



fleeting moment, and suppose I try to discover what my promise 
means in so far as it was an act. Then I am bound to recognise that 
it contains a decree so daring that it surprises me now. Allowing 
for the possibility of exterior conditions which may put it out of my 
power to keep my promise, I have admitted, however implicitly, 
that the state of my feelings was capable of alteration, but I decided 
at the same time that this eventual alteration was something of which 
I should not take account. Between the being who dares to say T 
and who has attributed to himself the power to bind bimsdf(I bind 
myself) between him and the endless world of causes and effects 
which simultaneously escape from my own jurisdiction and from 
all rational prevision, there is an intermediate realm, where events 
take place which are not in accordance with my desires or even 
with my expectation; yet I reserve to myself the right and the power 
to abstract from these events in my actions. This power of real 
abstraction is at the very core of my promise: this is what gives it 
its peculiar weight and worth. I will make an effort to fix my 
attention on this central datum, and not yield to the vertigo which 
threatens to overwhelm me when I see the gulf opening at my 
feet: in fact, what is this body of which I am at once master and 
slave? Can I, without folly or insincerity, relegate it to the huge 
foreign empire which eludes my grasp? But I cannot completely 
include it, either, in that subject realm where my own decree gives 
me the power to discount any of its contents. It seems to me equally 
true to say that I am and am not responsible for these bodily 
fluctuations; both assertions seem accurate to me, and both ridicu- 
lous. I will question myself no further on this point; enough to have 
recognised that in binding myself by a promise I have acknow- 
ledged the presence of an inner hierarchy, consisting of a ruling 
principle, and a life whose details remain unpredictable, but which 
the principle subjects to itself, or, still more accurately, which it 
pledges itself to keep under its yoke. 
D 49 M.B.H. 



I cannot help seeing that here I am repeating one of the common- 
places most often explored by the wisdom of antiquity; but perspec- 
tive plays us strange tricks: what seemed self-evident long ago takes 
on, in my eyes today, a paradoxical aspect. And what is more, I 
cannot help wondering if this decree will not be called a shocking 
act of violence by the supporters of that ethic of transparent honesty 
which I hear most commonly professed around me. Is not the very 
language of 'abstracting* or 'discounting* (which I have had to use 
several times) enough to breed considerable disquiet? How can I 
justify this dictatorship which I claim to exercise over my future 
actions, in the name of some present state? Where does this 
authority come from, and what lays claim to it? Am I not over- 
simplifying, when I distinguish from my present a subject which 
claims to go beyond it in a mental dimension which is not be to 
confused with duration, and which I can hardly figure out, even 
in idea? To look more closely, is not my present itself making an 
arbitrary claim to a sort of eternity of right? But in that case false- 
hood is established at the very heart of my life. For this pretended 
'eternity of right* no corresponding continuity of fact can be found; 
and it seems that I am brought up against the following dis- 
concerting alternatives. At the moment of my commitment, I either 
*(i) arbitrarily assume a constancy in my feelings which it is not 
really in my power to establish, or (2) I accept in advance that I 
shall have to carry out, at a given moment, an action which will in 
no way reflect my state of mind when I do carry it out. In the first 
case I am lying to myself, in the second I consent in advance to lie 
to someone else. 

Shall I seek reassurance by telling myself that these are just a 
cloud of subtleties concealing a really very simple problem, which 
life will make it its own business to solve? 

I cannot be content with such a lazy answer; the less so, since I 
can imagine at this moment a dozen cases where the problem is still 

50 



the same, but where its terms are of a kind which proclaim its 
seriousness even to the most careless thinker. To swear fidelity to a 
creature, to a group, to an idea, even to God in every case, is not 
this to expose ourselves to the same disastrous dilemma? Is not any 
promise whatever rooted in a state of mind which is entirely of the 
moment, and whose permanence nothing can guarantee? 

When I look at it like this, the very nature of fidelity seems to me 
suddenly covered by a thick veil; I can no longer understand what 
meaning the term 'commitment* has ever had for me. And now I 
call to mind once more the memory of all the disappointments, all 
the hatreds of myself and others which were the ordinary results of 
too hasty promises. Were they mere accidents? or must we see them, 
on the contrary, as the natural effects of a most inexcusable pre- 
sumption? At what price are they to be avoided? If we are to 
remain tied by our inward bond, must we not learn to shut our 
eyes to the contorted but fateful life-process which only a feeble 
sight will fail to discern beneath the accumulations of habit? To 
swear fidelity whatever the object to which the vow is taken 
what is it really but committing myself to ignore the deepest part 
of my being, to learn the art of duping myself constantly with 
tricks that I play upon myself, for my own deception? Indeed, can 
a commitment exist that is not a betrayal? 

But there is no betrayal which is not a repudiation of fidelity. Is 
there, then, such a thing as a basic fidelity, a primal bond, which I 
break every time I make a vow which in the least degree concerns 
what I vaguely call my soul? (Obviously there is no question here 
of vows about mere matters of the most outward and socialised 
activity, where I am as it were using a tool ready to my hand.) This 
primal bond can only be what some people have taught me to call 
fidelity to myself. Myself, they will say, is what I betray when I so 
bind myself. Myself: not my being but my becoming; not what I 
am today but what I shall perhaps be tomorrow. Here the mystery 



thickens. How can I be faithful, or again how can I be unfaithful, 
to the Me whom today cannot know, and only the future will 
reveal? Surely they mean me to understand just this; that I must 
keep myself at the disposal of the unknown Me, so that one day he 
can come into my place without meeting any resistance from the 
Me that I still am, but shall in that second have ceased to be? They 
are just asking me to lend myself to the game, and not in the least to 
stiffen my muscles and resist. The word fidelity has certainly under- 
gone a change here! It now sketches no more than a lazy acquies- 
cence, a graceful passivity. Well, but who prescribes it for me? this 
unknown whose prestige is entirely due to the fact that he does not 
yet exist? Amazing privilege for the unborn! But at least the privi- 
lege must be recognised, and once more I am in the dark. For the 
act by which this privilege of my future being is so consecrated is in 
fact part of my present: so we admit a value in the future in so far as 
it is a future which is attached to my present state, but which is 
nevertheless distinct from it, since it somehow has control of its 
successor. 

Shall I yield to the temptations of dialectic? Shall I admit that it 
is really my present state which is denied and claims to be trans- 
cended? Surely we cannot help regarding this as a manipulation to 
be mistrusted, since it implies, suppose I allow it, some sort of 
truth which transcends the life-process and is capable of serving as 
its foundation. But if this is so, there is no further question of my 
lending myself unresistingly to the current of my moods of the 
moment. Something which forms no part of them rules their 
caprices, perhaps a law. And it is my business to remain faithful to 
this law or unity. Terminology, however, threatens once more to 
lead me into error. This unity is just me; it is a single unvarying 
principle whether form or reality which insists upon its own 
continuity. The fidelity is no longer to a life-process, a 'becoming*, 
for this is meaningless, but to a king which I can see no possibility 



of distinguishing from myself. And so I escape from the mirage of 
a tomorrow which loses its colour as it sharpens its outlines. 

Have I at last found the way out? Have I escaped from the horns 
of the dilemma which seemed to forbid me to be sincere and faith- 
ful at once? The solution which occurs to me is not just a logical 
invention; a very simple word describes the hidden spring of the 
action by which I bind myself. To make it a point of honour to 
fulfil a commitment what else is this but putting an accent on the 
supra-temporal identity of the subject who contracts it and carries it 
out? And so I am brought to think that this identity has a validity 
in itself, whatever the content of my promise may be. This identity 
is the one important thing to maintain, however absurd the partic- 
ular commitment may appear, to the eyes of a spectator, through 
my rashness or weakness in undertaking it. However overwhelm- 
ingly men of sense object, however often my friends remonstrate, I 
shall take no notice; I have promised and will keep my word. 
Perhaps my persistence will even be proportionally strengthened as 
the carrying out of the promise looks to myself and others more and 
more like the fulfilment of a wager. 

But if this is so, the particular object, were it God himself, to 
which fidelity binds its votaries, must remain a pure accident, a 
sort of pretext. It cannot enter the closed circle in which the will 
returns upon herself in her effort after the demonstration of her own 
power. 

But I cannot really confuse this attachment of the soul to its own 
glory the most arid, strained, and irritable of all the forms of self- 
love with that which I have all my life called Fidelity. It cannot 
be pure chance that fidelity shows itself in its most unmistakable 
garb among those who have, on the contrary, the least concern to 
cut a figure in their own eyes. The face of a servant or a farm- 
labourer is its place of revelation for me. What can be the ground of 
so ruinous a confusion of two spiritual states, when the most super- 

53 



ficial judgment will assure me that they are forever incompatible? 
How can we help seeing that a fidelity to another of which I was 
myself the ground, the spring, and the centre that such a fidelity 
as this would expose yet again, by the furtive act of substitution it 
reveals, the lie at the heart of that existence which it shapes? 

How to get out of this deadlock? I must again tackle the precise 
problem, the dilemma, which I stated at the beginning; especially 
the problem of fidelity vowed to a person. I must refuse the choice 
of alternatives (continuity of the inner disposition or insincerity of 
action). I cannot base my argument on the effort of my own will. I 
must admit, then, that something unalterable is implied in the rela- 
tion itself. Must see further into the nature of this unalterable: where 
do I start if I am to get hold of it? Need to start from Being itself 
from commitment to God. 

It is an act of transcendence having its ontological counterpart in 
the hold God has over me. This hold is the term in relation to 
which even my freedom is ordered and defined. 

The mysterious relation between grace and faith exists wherever 
there is fidelity; and wherever a relation of this sort fails to appear, 
there is room for no more than a shadow of fidelity, a mere con- 
straint imposed upon the soul, although it may be both culpable 
and full of lies. 

A philosophy which refuses me the possibility of grasping any- 
thing but what it calls my 'states of consciousness' is seen to be 
manifestly false when we confront it with the spontaneous and ir- 
resistible assertion which forms, as it were, the ground-bass of 
human knowledge. In the same way, the contention that fidelity, 
despite appearances, is never more than a mode of pride and self- 
regard, unquestionably robs of their distinctive character the loftiest 
experiences that men think they have known. The correlation 
which unites these two Ventures' cannot be over-stressed. I believe 
I see a centre of light here; I feel I must try to get nearer to it. And I 

54 



believe that if a refution can be attempted in the one case, it should 
also be possible in the other, and along the same line of thought. 

When I say that I am unable to grasp any knowledge which 
transcends my states of consciousness, am I not lazily opposing this 
knowledge (a knowledge disappointing and even deceptive, since 
it contains a claim it cannot make good) to a knowledge which is 
not actually given, but which is at the very least ideally conceived, 
and, unlike the first, touches a reality independent of the mind 
which construes it? Without this axis of reference, however ima- 
ginary I may consider it, it is clear that the expression 'my states of 
consciousness* is emptied of its meaning, since that meaning is only 
definite if it remains restrictive. The important question to ask is: 
how can I conceive of a knowledge thus irreducible to that which 
according to this hypothesis I really enjoy? or even, a deeper 
question, do I actually conceive of it? If I admit that perhaps I do 
not conceive of it, that is enough to make the insecure doctrine 
which I claimed to preach fall to the ground at once. But it is 
scarcely in my power to understand how the idea of a real know- 
ledge, i.e. a reference to Being, could come to birth inside a world 
of pure states of consciousness. And so I begin to find a secret way 
of escape in the outer bailey of that tall keep in which I pretended 
to immure myself. Shall I not be forced to recognise from now 
onwards that this very idea is, as it were, the indelible mark which 
another order has left upon me? 

The same is true of fidelity. Across the attachments which the I 
vows to itself lies the shadow of another fidelity, and only the fact 
that I have first conceived it enables me to deny its existence my- 
self. But if it has been given me to conceive it at all, surely this is 
because I have dimly experienced it, whether in myself or in others? 
Surely it is no accident that I use those things which I affect no 
longer to believe in, as the models for my tentative picture of per- 
sonal reality, even while I allege that the distinctive character of this 

55 



reality is the continually renewed effort of coherence and balance 
between its two aspects? 

Am I not, moreover, justified in mistrusting the actual nature of 
the step by which I claim to gather up into myself the roots or 
links of all fidelity? How can I help seeing that such a dogged and 
^determined contempt of evidence cannot have its origin in experi- 
ence, however central and however hidden you suppose it to be: it 
can only originate in prejudice, in the act of fundamental negation 
by which I banish the Real to infinity, and then dare to usurp its 
place and dress myself up in its stolen attributes degrading them, 
it is true, in the process. 

Can we only rescue fidelity at this price? I think it would be a 
thousand times better if I resolved to see in it nothing but a survival, 
a lingering shadow which melts right away under the light of 
thought. Better that than to set up such idolatry at the centre of my 
life. 

Although I would not venture to assert that the connection can 
be observed in every case, yet I cannot fail to notice that where 
Fidelity is at her most unmistakable, where her face shines with 
clearest light, she goes hand in hand with a character as opposed to 
Pride as anything we can imagine. Patience and Humility gaze 
from the depths of her eyes. Patience and Humility; virtues whose 
very names today are forgotten, and whose true nature is further 
darkened to our sight with every step forward in man's technical 
and impersonal equipment, his logical and dialectical equipment 
with the rest. t 

The alliance of these three virtues into a unity the unity of a 
being whose ever-changing structure psychology has no power to 
fathom could not exist, could not even be thought of, in a purely 
personal system: where the self, and only the self, was the centre for 
those roots and links with reality, which uphold the commitments 
which Life may inspire us to undertake. 



December 

Consider non-representative musical expression. It is a sphere 
where the thing stated cannot be distinguished from the manner of 
stating it. In this sense and in this sense only, music has, strictly 
speaking, no meaning, but perhaps just because it is meaning. 
Explore this. 

The fact is that we introduce a relation into the heart of the 
music, a relation between the content expressed (?) and the expres- 
sion, which is of the same type as that which joins the expression to 
the execution. But this is an illegitimate transference. From this 
point of view the idea of objective music takes on a meaning, but it 
is a negative meaning. 

But is the term 'expression* really one that can still be used with 
regard to music? Could there really still be expression when we can 
no longer speak of content expressed a content distinct from the 
expression itself? I think the notion of essence, anyhow so difficult 
to define, might be introduced here. There is an essence of Schubert, 
of the later Beethoven, of the later Faure, etc. The expression would 
then be the opening-up of the essence to itself. I believe this is the 
idea to be explored. Combine the idea of essence with the idea of 
universe. The essence regarded as the highest point of a certain 
universe. It is almost impossible here to make abstraction from the 
metaphor of 'the summit', and this is the metaphor whose roots 
could usefully be laid bare. The idea of 'the summit* could perhaps 
be replaced by that of 'the centre 9 . In both cases there is a periphery, 
or to put it more accurately, precincts (zones of encroachment). 

NOTES ON JULIEN BENDA's *LE DISCOURS COHERENT* 

I propose to examine only the principles expounded in the first 
parts of the Discours Cobfrcnt, for the principles alone concern us 
here. 

M. Benda, on his own admission, has tried to construct a 

57 



thorough-going philosophy of the Infinite, or rather a sort of hyper- 
Eleaticism in which the principles of Parmenides are for the first 
time pressed to their final conclusions. In theory, I think, we may 
consider an attempt of this sort in the light of an interesting intellec- 
tual experiment, perhaps a stimulating one too, at any rate in so far 
as it provokes reactions and forces the critic to make his own 
position clear in his turn. 

M. Benda is really working up to a kind of confrontation; not a 
confrontation of two ideas but rather of two aspects of one and the 
same constant and central idea, that is, the idea of the world. 
'Sometimes I think of it as identical with itself, or in the mode of 
the phenomenal, and sometimes I think of it as contradictory to 
itself, or in the mode of the divine, but in the second case as in the 
first, it is still the world that I am thinking of/ An Eleatic if 
indeed there are any Eleatics who read this sentence, would 
certainly think at first that here was a typographical error of the 
worst kind; an inversion which turns the sense of the sentence 
topsy-turvy; since for him, obviously, to think of the world accord- 
ing to the phenomenal mode is to think of it in a contradictory way. 
All the same, the Eleatic would be wrong, and M. Benda is here 
saying exactly what he means. 

His contention in the first part of the Discours is in fact that to 
think of Being as infinite is really to think of it as contradictory. 
Let us see exactly what he understands by that. The demonstration 
he gives us refers to temporal being, but he hints that this demon- 
stration can and should be extended to other modes of being. 

'In so far as the duration which I assign to the world from today 
right back to its beginning, is represented in my mind by a finite 
number, however large, this duration will admit of another still 
larger one. If/ adds M. Benda, 'I want to conceive of a quantity 
of being, whose duration from the present moment right back to its 
beginning will not admit of a larger than itself, i.e. which will be 

58' 



infinite, I am obliged to conceive of a duration whose measure will 
be a number which escapes from this inherent slavery to finite 
number, i.e. a number n such that, if I add a unit to it, I obtain the 
number n+i, which is in no way different from n: a number n 
such that I have: 



p being some finite number. 

From this point of view it may be said that my time is the same as 
Julius Caesar's.' 

But we must not be taken in by the paradoxical look of the 
formula: in reality it is a complete truism. I have no right to say 
'my time is the same as Julius Caesar's', unless I just mean 'Given 
that there was no beginning of the world, I am no further away 
from this non-existent beginning than Julius Caesar was'. As a 
matter of fact, M. Benda avoids this explicit way of speaking, so 
that he leaves the reader with a confused notion that this beginning, 
placed in infinity, does nevertheless exist. , 

To say 'I am no further away from the beginning of the world 
than Julius Caesar was, since this beginning does not exist', is 
equivalent to saying that an event can only be placed by its relation 
to another event, and since there is no event which can be called 
'the beginning of the world', no absolute temporal fixing of any 
event is possible. 

No absolute fixing of an event in time is possible if one does not 
admit that the world did really begin. But M. Benda declares that 
to think of the world as infinite in respect of time is to think of it in 
such a way that its distinctions in time no longer exist, that is, to 
think of it in such a way that the differences it contains do not 
differ. I think there is a rather serious confusion here. So long as we 
are moving on the level where the distinction of times, or chrono- 
logy, holds good, it is quite impossible for us to consider this 
distinction to be removed or liable to be removed. 

59 



Ail one has the right to say is, that the meaning of these temporal 
distinctions is not ultimate, but only superficial, though within a 
certain register they retain their full validity. I may here use a simile 
to illustrate my meaning. A book is something which admits of a 
perfectly fixed pagination, and the person who has to arrange the 
sheets is bound to respect this single and irreversible order. But it is 
perfectly clear, on the other hand, that this book admits of types of 
unity which are far deeper than the unity expressed by the order 
of the pages. And yet this does not mean in the least that the order of 
the pages is 'illusory*. Now chronology is a sort of pagination of the 
world, and it would be quite absurd to speak of a beginning of this 
pagination which was placed at infinity. It would be a contradic- 
tion of terms, or rather it would be to think nothing at all, whereas 
it is not only permissible, but even inevitable, to rise to a point of 
view where this order of the pages appears as the superficial expres- 
sion of something infinitely deeper which can certainly be appre- 
hended from other aspects. 

From this point of view the formula = +/> is pure nonsense. 
We only have the right to say this; that from a certain point of view 
the difference between n and n + p ceases to tell us anything or mean 
anything to us. This is a completely different thing and implies no 
contradiction. 

And so the definition according to which infinite Being is Being 
in so far as it is self-contradictory, rests on a paralogism and can be 
ruled out at once. This affirmation would only be legitimate if we 
could think of temporal distinctions as being at once there and, as 
it were, not there. And this is just what we cannot do. We could 
also show that the confusion extends still further. M. Benda seems 
to identify the indeterminate with the self-contradictory. But this is 
unjustifiable. The contradiction only arises where definitions in- 
compatible with each other are attributed to the same subject; and 
in that case we should already have left the realm of the indetcrmin- 

60 



ate. The indeterminate is in fact prior to this double attribution. We 
could go much further yet in our criticism, and show in particular 
that M. Benda has no grounds for considering Being as the totality 
of its relations, since from his point of view (which is that of in- 
determinate being) it is inconceivable that these relations could 
form a totality. It is only too clear that he here swings light- 
heartedly between two opposite ontological positions whose opposi- 
tion he has never even noticed. 

The remarks I have just offered nullify in advance all the develop- 
ments following on the exposition of his principles. It is quite clear, 
especially in Chapter V, 1 that M. Benda is continually mixing up 
the indeterminate, which is only pure potentiality, and the supra- 
determinate of Being in its fulness, in whose depths all oppositions 
melt away. Are we to say that this supra-determinate, this fulness, 
is the place to which we clearly should turn our thoughts? All the 
indications are to the contrary to begin with, the text of p. 621, 
where M. Benda speaks of logical solitude or the sterility of the 
Absolute. It can be clearly seen, throughout the whole of his dialec- 
tic, that the more a being differentiates itself, the more it is guaran- 
teed against the return to God defined as initial indeterminacy. And 
here one fact (and I will return to it) is already clearly apparent, 
namely that the metaphysician the metaphysician in spite of him- 
self ! to whom M. Benda is most nearly akin, is not Parmenida 
or Spinoza, but the Spencer of the First Principles, a Spencer whc 
has read and made notes on Schopenhauer. 

I must now attack a different class of difficulties; this time w< 
must consider the actual notion of Cod as it appears in the Discour. 
Coherent. God, he says in 59, is nothing but the world thought o 
in a certain way. M. Benda specifies still further by saying tha 
what exists for him is not Divinity (noun) but the divine (adjectivi 
applied to the world). Here a preliminary question arises, which 
1 These references are to the text published by N.R.F. 
61 



will not take up but which ought at least to have been asked, 
namely, is it legitimate to speak of existence with regard to some- 
thing which is just an adjective? It is perfectly clear that what exists 
here is just the world: to say that the divine exists as such is non- 
sense. On the other hand I cannot take refuge in saying that 'the 
divine' is the world thought of as divine, for in that case I make it 
depend upon a subject which asserts itself to be such: but this 
dependence is radically excluded by M. Benda's position. 

But we shall see yet another contradiction arising here. If God 
is just the world thought of by me (or by X) as the simple un- 
defined, what can be the sense in asking what God knows? Yet we 
read in 58, 'God knows neither anxiety nor serenity; he knows 
freedom/ Should we object that the word 'know* cannot here be 
taken in its strict sense? As a matter of fact, M. Benda does explain 
in his development of the passage that the idea of God is bound up 
with the idea of freedom. But elsewhere, the term 'knowledge* is 
taken in its usual sense. In fact, M. Benda distinguishes two ways of 
thinking of the indeterminate. The first corresponds to the condi- 
tion of the phenomenal world arriving at the point where it changes 
to thinking of itself in the divine mode. The second corresponds to 
the condition of the world thinking of itself in the divine mode 
without having known the phenomenal world. M. Benda then 
declares (10, p. 481) that the first way is perhaps that in which 
indeterminate Being thinks of itself, knowing itself anew and never 
having known any other condition. This sentence is extraordinarily 
significant, and it is very clear that the 'perhaps', without altering its 
scope, only introduces an extra element of confusion. If we are to be 
allowed to speak of a 'way of thinking of itself * which belongs to in- 
determinate Being, of a knowledge which is peculiar to it, then it is 
quite obvious that it is once more being conceived as a noun. This 
is a formal contradiction of the declaration in 59. 

I think that if we examined the latter part of his exposition, we 

62 



should be met by a cloud of new and baffling difficulties. For 
instance, when M. Benda says that the idea of God and the idea of 
the phenomenal world, although irreducibles, are nevertheless cor- 
relatives (13, p. 624), we cannot help wondering what unity 
embraces this correlation, if it is not the subject which I spoke of 
just now. We can see at least the ghost of a third sphere coming 
into sight at this point, a sphere which would by definition be 
neither that of the phenomenal, nor that of indeterminate Being; 
but a sphere whose metaphysical and ontological status M. Benda 
cannot, as far as we can see, have a hope of defining. The fact is that 
in this line of country Plato and Hegel really carry all before them. 
We cannot play a part in their dialectic; it is simply imposed upon 
us, and to resist it as M. Benda does is pure and simple suicide. And 
no doubt that is an attitude permissible for an irrationalist. The 
irrationalist is within his rights to refuse dialectic. But if he does 
refuse dialectic, he a fortiori refuses indeterminate Being which is 
itself nothing but the most tenuous product of this dialectic. And 
here M. Benda's thought looks to me like a shamefaced irration- 
alism which is afraid to show itself in its true colours, and routs out 
of Heaven knows what old cupboard the most drab and shapeless 
cloak of reason that it can possibly find. This brings us to what I 
think is the most interesting and elusive part of the problem set by 
the Discours Coherent. The really important question, which M. 
Benda does not ask but which we must certainly ask, is how the 
metaphysical primacy which he gives to indeterminate Being can 
possibly be justified. I want to press this point a little further. 

Actually this point is all the more important since M. Benda, 
unlike the metaphysicians of the past, absolutely refuses to identify 
the infinite with perfection. This is a point upon which he had 
akeady explained himself in his study on the idea of order and the 
idea of God. 'Perfection is an attribute entirely foreign to the nature 
of God. The idea of something perfect, that is, finished, accom- 

63 



plished, is essentially incompatible with the idea of infinite Being, 
but rather bound up of necessity with the idea of determinate Being.' 
In the Essay on the Idea of Order and the Idea of God, he made an 
explicit attack on the idea of supreme Being, absolutely refused to 
place God at the apex of a hierarchy, and even went so far as to say 
that this hierarchy was foreign to God. I note in passing that there 
does not seem to be complete agreement between the two texts, 
since M. Benda, in the Idea of Order, might seem disposed to attri- 
bute to God an infinite perfection, whereas later he flatly denies 
Him perfection. But I think that the second position is really his 
own, so this is the one to be examined. 

The infinite God of M. Benda is a God certainly not imperfect, 
but not perfect either. But then we shall again be met by the diffi- 
culty I pointed out a minute ago; the easier it is to understand that 
the name God can be given to a being defined as perfect, the harder 
is the position when a reality is in question which is not existent 
and not perfect, because infinite. And I repeat my question; whence 
the primacy? M. Benda will no doubt try to exclude the very word 
primacy, alleging that it ipso facto re-establishes the hierarchy which 
he will not have at any price. But my answer is, that God is not a 
word which we have the right to use arbitrarily, for it embodies 
certain values, and certain feelings are crystallised round it (and 
here it is clear that the notions of perfection and supremacy reappear 
instantly). But we may well ask whether these values are compatible 
with the attributes of Being as M. Benda defines it. At the worst, no 
doubt, I should understand him if he refused to consider things 
from this angle and established himself in a sort of enclosed sanctu- 
ary where he remained alone with his own particular God, but 
unfortunately he does not do this, as witness p. 475. 'Not to speak 
of philosophers/ says he, 'it seems to me that simple people, those 
who only seek their theology in the needs of their hearts, have 
(among many other ideas which contradict them)* I will return 

64 



to this parenthesis 'an idea of God remote from all notion of the 
particularity and limitation which at times causes suffering to them. 
This is what they seem to indicate, when they express the hope that 
in God all our pride will be melted away/ etc. . . . But surely it is 
these 'other* ideas, these 'contradictory ideas', and especially those 
of divine justice and charity, which constitute the conception of 
God fostered in the minds of the humble folk whom M. Benda is 
kind enough to remember here. But this just or charitable God, 
this God who is God only because of His infinite justice and 
charity, has clearly nothing to do with the indeterminate Being of 
M. Benda; he cannot hope to find a single ally among the simple 
folk. Then must he not recognise, if he wants to make his position 
in the least coherent, that his God has no value, in the usual or even 
in the technical sense of the word? But then, given that anyhow it is 
probable that He does not exist, it is difficult not to ask what pre- 
vents us from simply deleting Him. I think we must expect M. 
Benda, in spite of everything, to try to take his stand on the line of 
value: only I here repeat my question: What kind of value is it 
possible to impute to an indeterminate Being? It is on this question 
that I should personally be most anxious to see him explain him- 
self, but as I said at the beginning, I very much doubt if he can do 
it. In fact I feel sure that the whole thing is really a mask the mask 
huddled on by a will which is perfectly resolved not to be explicit 
with itself. Personally, I should have little hesitation in calling it the 
expression of a sterility somewhat after the Mallarme pattern, a 
conscious sterility which cannot bear its own presence and so con- 
verts itself into a will for sterility, and deifies itself under that aspect. 
This self-deification is only too obviously at the heart of M. Benda's 
writings. I will even go so far as to say that it is doubly present 
there, and instantly self-destroyed; for the curious theogony which 
is pictured for us, the double process whereby the world is divided 
from God in order to return to Him, all takes place in the conscious- 
E 65 M.B.H. 



ness of M. Benda, who seems to be somehow divided between his 
God and his universe. I may add in conclusion, that idealism, 
which I personally reject, regains all its force in the presence of such 
a doctrine as this; since in the final analysis, and taken on the 
whole, this is perhaps the poorest and most contradictory of all its 
expressions. 

But suppose we admit, for the moment, that the previous objec- 
tions can be met. Suppose which I most expressly deny that this 
idea of God can be regarded as tenable. Even so we have still to ask 
how the passage from God to the world can take place in M. Benda's 
system. Here we shall be witnesses of an extraordinary drama. 

M. Benda thinks that he has established theirreducibility of the two 
fundamental ways of thinking of the world: the first a divine mode 
in the category of contradiction, the other a phenomenal mode in 
the category of identity. What does this mean? It means that there 
are here two ideas which do not touch at any point, so that we can 
no more pass from one idea to the other than, for instance, we can 
pass from blueness to triangularity. But the surprising thing is, 
that M. Benda passes quite unconsciously from the consideration 
of ideas to that of things; we read immediately afterwards that the 
phenomenal world cannot be conceived in relation to God except 
by a separation from God, and not by a continuous emanation 
from God to itself. But indeed there was no question of anything of 
the kind: and I deny that this separation, which is given as an act 
(obviously a non-temporal act) has the least connection with the 
irreducibility of ideas which M. Benda thought he had previously 
established. This word separation, already far too concrete, will not 
content him: immediately afterwards he will be speaking to us of 
aversion, no doubt speculating with a view to later elaborations on 
the emotional significance of that word. Three lines further on he 
speaks of impiety. But the simplest metaphysical reflection will be 
enough to show us how fundamentally unintelligible all this is I 

66 



would even say, un-tbougbt-out. How can determinate Being separate 
itself from indeterminate Being? It is inconceivable except in a 
philosophy of the neo-Platonic type, in which the absolute prin- 
ciple is not indeterminate, but rather, if I may so express it, supra- 
determinate. In that case, determinacy seems to denote an im- 
poverishment, but in these systems of philosophy the indeterminate, 
i.e. matter, is at the lowest point in the series. Besides, M. Benda 
cannot make room for such an idea in his system, since he will not 
so much as hear of hierarchy. It therefore seems clear to me that M. 
Benda is transposing what he believes to be a radical hiatus between 
determinate and indeterminate being, into a sphere where this 
hiatus cannot help altering its character. At the same time those 
very metaphysical categories, which he claimed to have eliminated, 
begin to multiply round this hiatus. And this is all due to the fact 
that he is really intent on constructing a system with a sort of 
Schopenhauerian modulation. An entirely unconscious dialectic 
which governs his most hidden will, compels him forthwith to 
bring into his premisses, in a way that changes and shatters them, 
just those dynamic elements which it was characteristic of his meta- 
physical position to exclude, but which he needs to justify his self- 
consciously priest-like attitude. 

At the point we have now reached, there is one question which 
we should find it difficult not to ask; why do we not just get rid of 
this indeterminate or infinite Being, which looks sometimes like a 
mere non-being and sometimes like a sort of depository containing, 
all higgledy-piggledy, those elements which the phenomenal world 
has foolishly claimed to arrange in hierarchical order? Why not 
simply keep the third part of the Discours Coherent, which gives us, 
in substance, a Spencerian picture of the universe, enriched (or com- 
plicated) by additions borrowed from Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, 
and M. Bergson? Could we not build up a philosophy of im- 
perialism on a foundation of almost traditional notions, such as 

67 



the will to live or the will to power? But in that case, what would 
become of the fourth part, that is, the return of the world towards 
God? Remark in passing that this fourth part is a kind of pendant 
to the fourth book of The World as Will and Idea. This is, for the 
moment, unimportant; as I was saying just now, M. Benda is 
forced to take his stand on the line of value. It must be damned, 
this world of the phenomenal, that is, of particularity, of individu- 
alisation and of imperialism, or at least it must be able to be thought 
of as damned. Why the 'must'? Why, just because M. Benda has 
written La Trabison des Clercs. 1 'That is absurd,' you will say. 'It is 
the opposite which is true. M. Benda wrote La Trabison des Clercs 
to bring the world back to reason/ But I think I can uphold my 
assertion. The fact that there is a book called La Trahison des Clercs 
is a reason why the phenomenal world must be conceivable as being 
capable of damnation: but it cannot be unless it is thought of as 
having separated itself from something which is ... which is what? 
We cannot say that it is either the Good, or absolute intelligence. 
We will just say that it is God. The existence of God hangs on the 
existence of La Trabison des Clercs. You return to the charge, and tell 
me 'If M. Benda wrote La Trahison des Clercs, he did so in the name 
of the metaphysic which is developed in Le Discours Coherent'. I do 
not believe a word of it. La Trabison des Clercs is a book which 
seems to me based solely upon a psychology of temperament, a 
psychology, moreover, which is narrowly Jewish. But we are in a 
realm where every assertion aspires to justify itself; so La Trabison des 
Clercs has naturally enough brought up from the basement a whole 
system of protective screens which we have before our eyes today 
and which is naturally called upon to function in a certain quite 
definite sense. But it is just like human nature that the man who 
invented them should be the last man to realise where they came 
from or what their results will be. 

1 The Betrayal of the Clerks. 
68 



March nth, 

Charity thought of as presence, as absolute disposability; I have 
never before seen its link with poverty so clearly. To possess is 
almost inevitably to be possessed. Things possessed get in the way. 
All this needs much more thorough treatment. 

At the heart of charity is presence in the sense of the absolute gift 
of one's-self, a gift which implies no impoverishment to the giver, 
far from it; and so we are here in a realm where the categories valid 
in the world of things entirely cease to be applicable. These catego- 
ries, as we must see, are strictly bound up with the very idea of a 
thing. If I have four things and give two away, it is obvious that I 
only have two left, and that I am correspondingly impoverished. But 
this only makes sense if I suppose a certain close relationship be- 
tween myself and the things, if I consider them consubstantial, so 
to say, with myself, if I am myself affected, in the strongest sense of 
the word, by their presence or absence. 

Thresh out the notion of non-disposability. I think it corresponds 
to that which fundamentally constitutes the creature considered as 
such. From this point of view, I wonder if we could not define the 
whole spiritual life as the sum of activities by which we try to 
reduce in ourselves the part played by non-disposability. Note 
connection between the fact of being non-disposable and the fact of 
feeling or thinking we are indispensable. Show, in fact, that this 
non-disposability is inseparable from a kind of self-adherence, 
which is something more primitive and still more fundamental 
than self-love. 

Death as the flat denial of non-disposability. 

To my mind, we have here a mine of important considerations. 
For we sec here the necessity for distinguishing between love of 
one's-self regarded as non-disposable, and love of one's-self regarded 
as disposable, that is, love of what God may make of me. This 
lawful self-love is illuminated by its opposite, namely, the hatred of 

69 



self which may be contained in a certain kind of death-wish. The 
question also of the relative non-disposability of the self for itself. 
Some extremely interesting questions to work out here. 

Analysis of the notion of non-disposability. 

It seems to me that it always implies the notion of transference. 
Non-disposable capital is capital which is already partially trans- 
ferred. This is perfectly clear in the case of material wealth. Now 
we must see how the notion can be extended in the way I pointed 
out this morning. A typical case comes into my mind. Some mis- 
fortune I hear about demands my pity, but I feel that I cannot give 
it. Theoretically I realise that what they are telling me is strangely 
worthy of pity, yet I feel nothing. If the wretchedness they describe 
were actually before my eyes, it would no doubt be otherwise. An 
immediate experience would unseal the springs of my compassion, 
would force the damned gates. A strange thing! I should like to 
feel the emotion which seems to me to 'impose itself* (I judge that 
it is normal to be touched in such cases), but I feel nothing; I am 
not at my own disposal. No doubt by putting myself through my 
mental paces I could flog myself into something resembling this 
emotion, but if I am sincere it cannot deceive me; I shall know 
quite well that it is a worthless imitation. There are two limiting 
cases, the child and the saint, where this pawning of one's liberty, 
so difficult to define strictly, does not take place: it is evidently 
bound up with what may be called the normal growth of experi- 
ence. And here we return to what I wrote about a few years ago; 
life cannot be played without stakes; life is inseparable from some 
form of risk. As my life becomes more and more an established 
thing, a certain division tends to be made between what concerns 
me and what does not concern me, a division which appears 
rational enough in the making. Each one of us thus becomes the 
centre of a sort of mental space, arranged in concentric zones of 
decreasing interest and decreasing adherence, and to this decreasing 

70 



adherence there corresponds an increasing non-disposability. This 
is something so natural that we forget to give it any thought or any 
representation at all. Some of us may have happened upon an en- 
counter which in some fashion broke up the lines of this personal 
egocentric topography. I can understand, for I have experienced it, 
that from a stranger, casually met, may come a call too strong to be 
resisted: suddenly all our perspectives are turned inside-out; what 
seemed inseparably near is suddenly at an infinite distance, and the 
distant near. Such experiences are fleeting, breaches that are 
instantly closed, and yet I believe that these experiences however 
disappointing, and they can be so disappointing that they leave us 
with a bitter sadness and sense of mockery at our very hearts still 
have this inestimable benefit; they force us to become sharply 
aware of the accidental character of what I have called our mental 
space, and of the rigidities on which its possibility rests. Above 
all there is sanctity, realised in certain people, which is there to show 
us that what we call the normal state is assuredly, from one point of 
view, simply the perversion of a state diametrically opposed to it. 

It is doubtless a metaphysical falsity to say 'I am my life*. The 
statement implies a confusion which thought will bring to light. 
The confusion is not only inevitable, but it even lies at the roots of 
the human drama and gives it a part of its meaning. The drama 
would lose its majesty if the man who laid down his life did not 
find himself so placed that the sacrifice could or must, if faith is 
lacking seem to him to be a total sacrifice. 

We must see that in presuming to break fundamentally with 
what I called the normal state of secular experience, we should be 
guilty not only of rashness, but also of real error, unless we were 
responding to some clarion call. All that we can do is to admit, at 
least in thought, that these conditions imply an anomaly if we look 
at them from that transcendent point of view which something 
v/ithin us seems to demand that we should occupy. 



Could we not maintain that what we call space; in the ordinary 
sense of the word, is really nothing but a kind of translation of the 
system of concentric zones which I described above? But, in this 
connection, we may ask whether the doing away with distance has 
not a twofold significance. It implies a change in our physical idea 
of space, but at the same time it deprives the distinction between 
the far and the near of its qualitative value. There is no parallel 
result, it seems, with regard to time: but this is just because the past 
escapes our grasp because it is the past, because it is essentially some- 
thing before which we are powerless. Even here we should go still 
deeper: for if the materiality (!) of the past is immutable, it still 
takes on a different value and colour according to the aspect from 
which we consider it, and this aspect varies with our present, that is 
to say, it varies with the changes in our action. (I quote an example 
which happened to come into my mind. A man has lived a light- 
less life and worked himself to death, perhaps in despair. It obvi- 
ously depends upon those who come after him to bring out the 
consequences of his life which are capable of giving it meaning and 
worth a posteriori. Yet even this is not enough. Something in us 
demands that those consequences should be known to the man 
who by his life, by his obscure sacrifice, made them possible. We 
must ask what this demand is worth: is it dejure valid? and up to 
what point should we say that real fact can ignore it? Difficult 
questions to put in an intelligible way.) 

The connection of non-disposability and consequently non- 
presence with self-preoccupation. A kind of mystery there; I 
believe we could find a whole theory of the Thou within it. When 
I am with a non-disposable person, I am conscious of being with 
someone for whom I do not exist, and so I am thrown back upon 
myself. 

Can I define God as absolute presence? This would embrace my 
idea of absolute succour. 



March ijth 

Being non-disposable; being occupied with self. But this 'with 
self * needs consideration. We can see by analysis that there is no 
difference, from the point of view I am taking up, between being 
occupied with one's health, one's future, one's mistress, or one's 
temporal success. Surely the conclusion follows that to be occupied 
with one's-self is not to be occupied with a determinate object, but 
rather to be occupied in a certain way which remains to be defined. 
We might approach our definition by way of the idea of a spiritual 
opaqueness or blockage. When I look at my own deepest experi- 
ence, it seems to me that in every such case, we are conscious of 
being fixed within a zone or determinate scale, in an anxiety which 
is itself essentially indeterminate. But, contrary to what a superficial 
inquiry would seem to show, this anxiety (even, this indeterminacy) 
remains present at the heart of the fixation; it gives a character of 
exasperation which causes it to remain compatible with the agitation 
constantly going on at the centre of this limited zone. This anxiety 
here I join with Heidegger and perhaps Kierkegaard this 
anxiety is surely the agony of a creature living in time, the agony of 
feeling one's-self at the mercy of time. (Not that it is necessary to 
bring in here the element of reflection properly so called.) The 
agony brings with it unhope a word from one of Thomas Hardy's 
poems and this unhope in relation to a determinate object changes 
to despair. In contrast to all this see what we mean by 'not caring'. 

If all this is well-founded, the metaphysical origins of pessimism are 
the same as the origins of non-disposability. This should be related to 
what I have said about joy and hope. 

We must return to my former observation, that the make-up of 
our universe admits of hope, and we must see its ontological 
significance. 

We shall also have to ask whether the Thou, regarded as worth 
or reality, is not a function of what I have called my inward dis- 

73 



posability. And we must study the place of hope in the theory of the 
Thou (what inputting trust in? putting your trust in the universe?). 

Anxiety, as I called it, seen as a radical deformity, as a datum (or 
at least possible datum) that is universal. The most concrete image 
I can form of it is drawn from the horrible feeling I have sometimes 
had in the dark, of feeling myself at its mercy, with nothing to hold 
onto. 

I am wondering just now whether there are not grounds for 
showing that the various technical accomplishments are salutary 
weapons of defence against this state of powerlessness. They by no 
means imply in themselves that fixation of which I spoke. There is 
a healthful value in doing as such. But it is possible to pass on to 
the idolatry of technical ability, analysed elsewhere in this book. 

It is so important to show that fear and desire are both on the 
same level, and inseparable, but that hope is placed in another 
zone, which is not that of Spinozan ethics and with which Spinoza 
himself was unacquainted. (Spinoza spoke ofspes and metus cor- 
relatively; and our natural inclination is certainly to do the same.) 
The zone of hope is also that of prayer. 

March i$th 

On analysing the question closely, we find that the nature of hope 
is very hard to define. I will take two examples: to hope for the 
recovery from illness or for the conversion of a person dear to us, 
and to hope for the liberation of one's oppressed country. The hope 
here is for something which, according to the order of nature, does 
not depend upon us (it is absolutely outside the zone where stoicism 
can be practised). At the root of the hope is the consciousness of a 
state of things which invites us to despair (illness, damnation, etc.). 
To hope is to put one's trust in reality, to assert that it contains the 
means of triumphing over this danger; and here it can be seen that 
the correlative of hope is not fear, far from it, but the act of making 

74 



the worst of things, a sort of pessimistic fatalism which assumes the 
impotence of reality or which will not grant that it can take account 
of something even if it is not Just our good, but rather, as we think, 
a good in the absolute sense of the word. 

This evening I have apprehended the nature of hope more clearly 
than I have ever done before. 

It always has to do with the restoration of a certain living order in 
its integrity. 

But it also carries with it the affirmation of eternity and eternal 
goods. 

It is therefore of her very essence that when Hope has been 
deceived in the realm of the visible, she should take refuge on a 
plane where she can be disappointed no more. This links up with 
my most time-honoured meditations on the unverifiable, which 
were a groping anticipation of what I see clearly today. 

Even the integrity of the organism when I hope for the recovery 
of an invalid is, as it were, the prefiguring or symbolical expression 
of a supreme integrity. 

In this sense I say that all hope is hope of salvation, and that it is 
quite impossible to treat of the one without treating of the other. 
But in someone like Spinoza, and also among the disciples of 
Stoicism, this idea of salvation is literally stripped of all meaning. 
There is no place for salvation except in a universe which admits of 
real injuries. 

It should now be shown that the object of desire is never integrity 
as such, but that it is always a mode of enjoying, just as the object 
of fear is a mode of suffering. But salvation is undoubtedly above 
this opposition. Yet all this is still not quite clear to me. 

I was thinking this morning that hope is only possible in a world 
where there is room for miracles; and this evening the sense of this 
reflection is becoming clearer to me. Here, too, I believe I join 
forces with Kierkegaard, or at least with some of his continuators. 

75 



March ijth 

If I have discerned rightly, there is a close bond of union between 
hope and a certain affirmation of eternity, that is, of a transcendent 
order. 

I On the other hand as I say in Remarks on the Imligion of Today 
a world where techniques are paramount is a world given over 
to desire and fear; because every technique is there to serve some 
desire or some fear. It is perhaps characteristic of Hope to be unable 
either to make direct use of any technique or to call it to her aid. 
Hope is proper to the unarmed; it is the weapon of the unarmed, 
or (more exactly) it is the very opposite of a weapon and in that, 
mysteriously enough, its power lies. Present-day scepticism about 
hope is due to the essential inability to conceive that anything can 
be efficacious when it is no sort of a power in the ordinary sense of 
that word. 

Here I am afraid we come up against one of the hardest of meta- 
physical problems, and one which seems almost a contradiction in 
terms. We cannot help asking ourselves how hope can be effective; 
but the very form of the question takes it for granted that we are 
unconsciously comparing hope to a technique which operates in a 
mysterious fashion, let us say magically. 1 

We must be perfectly clear that this real efficacy, which is the 
counterpart of a complete inefficacy on the phenomenal level, can 
only be conceived when the powerlessness is in fact absolute; where 
there is no pretence or evasion (such as we find in a consciousness 
which through sloth or cowardice falsely persuades itself that it can 
do nothing). 

Could we not say that a certain activity we should have to 
clarify the sense of the word later finding its way barred in the 
empirical realm, that is, in the realm of action, changes its level and 

1 It is hardly necessary to point out that all this has a bearing on the 
metaphysical problem of prayer. 

76 



turns into hope, but for all that does not lose the efficacy with which 
it was in some manner endowed from its birth? There is a kind of 
parallel to this in what happens to a river when its course is 
dammed by an obstruction. I would say that the estuaries of Hope 
do not lie entirely within the bounds of the visible world. ' 

Hence, perhaps, we can see why the prayers of a defenceless 
creature are endowed with a greater efficacy. 

And yet I know quite well that here I am merely skirting the 
problem, and that I cannot escape from stating it, and from asking 
myself confusedly what sort of power can belong to no-action and to 
no-technique. We are here at the heart of die problems raised by the 
essential Christian data, especially non-resistance to evil. 

I can just make out the following in a very disjointed way: 

(1) We are no longer in the realm of causes or laws, the realm of 
the universal. Hope not being a cause, and not acting mechanically, 
it is quite obvious that we cannot say, 'Every time somebody 
practises the virtue of hope, such and such a thing will come to 
pass:' for this would in fact mean that we were making hope into a 
technique, that is to say, into its own opposite (incidentally, I 
notice what a strong temptation there is to regard it in this light). 

(2) Is it not clear that the efficacy of hope, in some cases, lies in 
its disarming value? In the case of non-resistance at least, this is quite 
intelligible. If I oppose violence, that is, if I put myself on the same 
ground as violence, it is quite certain that I tend to keep it up and 
thereby even to reinforce it; in this sense it is true to say that all 
combat implies a sort of fundamental connivance between the two 
sides, a common will for the battle to go on; this state of affairs does 
not end until they reach the point where it becomes radically im- 
possible to treat war as if it were a game, and the will to destroy 
takes its place; and this will lets loose an opposite (i.e. an identical) 
will on the other side. Could we not maintain that the will to 
destroy cannot be justified in its own eyes unless an identical will 

77 



can be presumed in the other, that is, the enemy? Can it conceive 
itself except as lawful defence? If it thenceforth meets with non " 
resistance, it is negated at once, is completely disarmed. 

I hasten to add that I have the gravest hesitation in concluding 
from these reflections that unilateral disarmament is dejure justified. 
If we had to examine the question, we should begin by asking why 
the transition from the metaphysical to the empirical should raise 
such serious difficulties in this province. 

It would seem, then, that Hope has the unusual virtue of some- 
how putting in a false predicament the powers over which it claims 
to triumph, not by fighting them, far from it, but by transcending 
them. Moreover, its efficacy seems all the surer when the weakness 
accompanying it is more real and less of a sham; in other words, 
when it is less liable to be considered as a hypocritical disguise of 
cowardice. 

The spontaneous objections we feel against this way of thinking 
may seem almost irresistible. For instance, how can we explain a 
recovery from illness in that way? 

But then it must be not forgotten that it is in the invisible world 
that Hope flows out to sea. Hope is nothing like a short cut for 
pedestrians, taken when the road is blocked and joining the road 
again on the other side of the obstacle. 

No need to say that all these reflections go hand-in-hand with my 
remarks on non-disposability. The more non-disposable a man is, 
the less room there is in him for hope. And we should here mention 
the growing non-disposability of the whole modern world. 

I wondered this afternoon whether the efficacy of hope might not 
be related to the very force of the grip on reality which it pre- 
supposed (this is the working-out of what I was writing yesterday 
evening about integrity). But this interpretation, though attractive, 
is a little dangerous. To tell the truth I still do not see my way 
clearly. The problem is infinitely complicated by the fact that hope 

78 



obviously partakes of the nature of 'gift* or 'merit*. This must be 
sifted out methodically, but I do not yet know how to go about my 
task. 

We ought to note, without delay, the point at which hope over- 
flows the affirmation of a sollen. It is really a prophetic power. It 
has no bearing on what should be or even on what must be; it just 
says 'This will be*. Reflecting on hope is perhaps our most direct 
means of apprehending the meaning of the word 'transcendence', 
for hope is a spring, it is the leaping of a gulf. 

It implies a kind of radical refusal to reckon possibilities, and 
this is enormously important. It is as though it carried with it as 
postulate the assertion that reality overflows all possible reckonings; 
as though it claimed, in virtue of some unknown secret affinity, to 
touch a principle hidden in the heart of things, or rather in the heart 
of events, which mocks such reckonings. Here I might quote 
excellent sayings from Peguy and perhaps Claudel, which touch 
the very depths of my own perceptions. 

Hope, in this sense, is not only a protestation inspired by love, 
but a sort of call, too, a desperate appeal to an ally who is Himself 
also Love. The supernatural element which is the foundation of 
Hope is as clear here as its transcendent nature, for nature, un- 
illuminated by hope, can only appear to us the scene of a sort of 
immense and inexorable book-keeping. 1 

Another point; I wonder if we do not see here some of the limita- 
tions of Bergsonian philosophy, for it seems to me that there is not 
the least room in it for what I call integrity. To a Bergsonian, salva- 
tion lies in pure freedom; to a metaphysic which is Christian in its 

1 We should ask ourselves what sort of science leads to despair, and 
how far a science of this sort damns itself. The problem of hope and 
science, sail more fundamental than the problem of determinism and 
freedom. I shall have to take up the idea of perdition again, which has 
already attracted me at an earlier stage. See how hope, in its essence, dives 
into the invisible world. (Note written Dec. 8th, 193 1.) 

79 



essence, freedom has an aim assigned to it, and that aim is salvation. 
I can only repeat once more, that the archetypal hope is the hope of 
salvation; but it seems that salvation can only be found in contem- 
plation. I do not think we can reach beyond this. 

The lines I wrote this afternoon on not-reckoning possibilities 
lead me to think that we ought to bring together hope and will 
(not, of course, the same thing as desire). Is not hope a will 
whose field of operation is in infinity? A formula to be worked out 
fully. 

Just as there can be an evil will, so we should be able to con- 
ceive a diabolical hope, a hope which is perhaps the very essence of 
him whom we call the Devil. 

Will, hope, prophetic vision: all this stands, all this is firmly 
fixed in a man, outside the range of a purely objective reason. I 
shall now have to develop the notion of disillusionment, the idea 
of a power of automatic refutation belonging to experience as such. 
The soul lives by hope alone; hope is perhaps the very stuff of 
which our souls are made. This, too, should be worked out. To 
despair of a man is not this to deny him as a soul? To despair of 
one's-self is it not anticipating suicide? 

March 22nd, 1931 (a miserable Sunday) 

Time is like a well whose shaft goes down to death to my 
death to my perdition. 

The gulf of time: how I shudder to look down on time! My 
death is at its bottom and its dank breath mounts up and chills 
me. 

March 2$tb 

We must finish with the notion of divine prescience, which dis- 
torts everything and makes the problem absolutely insoluble: from 
the moment we assume that the divine vision is prior, in whatever 

80 



sense, to the free action to which it refers, we cannot avoid pre- 
destination. And yet we must not fall into the opposite error of 
speaking of God's observation, as Father A - was doing yesterday 
at Berdyaev's. God does not observe anything. 

I think I see it something like this. First of all, this apprehension 
of my act by God cannot be posited as an objective datum (in the 
sense in which I might say, for instance, that someone is at this 
moment picking up my words by wireless). It cannot be con- 
ceived by me unless I am myself on a certain spiritual level. I 
sail cannot see clearly what follows from this, but I feel it will be 
important. 



March 

Substitute co-presence for prescience. But co-presence cannot be 
expressed in terms of co-existence. We must never forget that God 
is not 'someone who' etc. 

I was led yesterday to consider more closely the distinction be- 
tween thinking and understanding. Is there perhaps something 
rather fallacious about the idea of a thought which is not under- 
standing? Surely thinking, in that case, is just believing that one 
thinks? 

We only understand on the basis of what we are. It seems to me 
that co-presence can only be understood by a person placed in a 
certain spiritual position. Here again we come back to the meta- 
physic of the Thou and the notion of non-disposability. The 
more non-disposable I am, the more will God appear to me as 
'someone who'. 1 And that is just a denial of co-presence. We 
should try to see how memory comes in here, memory considered as 
fidelity (to an act of comprehension remembered but not renewable 
at will). ' 

1 It seems to me that this lays bare the very roots of atheism. The God 
whom atheism denies is in fact a 'someone who* in his very essence. 
F 8l M.B.H. 



Relate the notion of non-disposability with my earlier remarks on 
my body*. 

I shall use the word 'corporeity' to mean that property which 
makes it impossible for me to picture a body as living except on 
:ondition of thinking of it as the 'body of. . .'. 

Corporeity to be regarded as the frontier district between being 
md having. All having defines itself somehow in terms of my body, 
i.e. in terms of something which, being itself an absolute 'having* 
:eases in virtue of this very fact to be a 'possession* in any sense of 
the word. 'Having* is being able to dispose of, having a power 
over; it seems clear to me that this disposal or power always implies 
the interposal of the organism, i.e. of something about which, for 
that very reason, I cannot say that it is at my disposal. The meta- 
physical mystery of non-disposability may essentially consist in the 
impossibility, for me, of really being able to dispose of that which 
gives me the disposal of things. The objection may be made that I 
can nevertheless dispose of my body since I have the physical power 
of killing myself. But it is obvious that such a disposal of my body 
has as its immediate result the impossibility of disposing of it, and 
even coincides with this impossibility in the final analysis. My body 
is something of which I can only dispose, in the absolute sense of 
the term, by putting it into such a state that I shall no longer have 
any power to dispose of it. This absolute disposal is therefore in 
reality a putting out of use. 

Shall we be tempted to object that I dispose of my body to the 
extent that, for instance, I change my position? But obviously, in 
another sense, and to an equal extent, I entrust myself to it and 
depend upon it. 

In short, it is clear that I try with all my will to establish condi- 
tions such that I can think I dispose of my body. But it is no less 
clear that there is something in my very nature which blocks my 
power even really to make this relation between my body and me 

82 



the same as my relation with other things, and this is because of the 
sort of irresistible encroachment of my body upon me which is at 
the basis of my state as man or creature. 1 

March jotb 

Reflected this morning on 'having*. It seems evident to me that 
'having* always implies an obscure notion of assimilation (I only 
have something which has been made mine, in some way, no 
matter what), and it therefore also implies reference to a past. On 
the one hand, we cannot help connecting having with the notion 

1 1 think I have not made full enough use of these remarks. They seem 
to me to open perspectives, which are relatively new, upon a whole group 
of obscure problems centring round what may be called physical miracle, 
or more accurately upon the hidden connections which undoubtedly 
exist between the realisation of a certain degree of inner perfection 
(sanctity) and what appears to us as the exercise of supra-normal powers. 
Perhaps a man is really less of a slave to his body in proportion as he 
makes less of a claim to have it at his disposal. May it not be that this 
claim, which looks like a sign of power, is really a form of slavery? A 
throng of conclusions would follow. The problem of miraculous cures, 
in particular, should be considered from this point of view. It would not 
be out of place to ask whether the fact of self-surrender or self-abandon- 
ment might not have as a result (not, of course, a necessary result) a change 
in the union of the soul and body, as we so confusedly call it. It is con- 
ceivable that the rebellious invalid, who by definition clings to the claim 
to dispose of his body in his own sense, but who is actually forced to 
recognise at the same time that his claim is ignored by 'reality', finds 
himself ipso facto placed in a state of non-disposability which is even 
physical, and which is far more radical than that experienced by the other 
invalid who surrenders himself to a superior power, whatever his idea of 
that power may be. I will do no more than call attention to this. It would 
be rashness, even folly, to attempt a stricter treatment of the theme, and 
there could be no question of actually admitting that the invalid's act of 
putting himself in God's hand automatically causes his state to change 
for the better. If it were so, the act of surrender would lose its character; 
worse, it would, by becoming an expedient, actually change into its 
opposite. Surely this is an object-lesson of the workings of the mysterious 
link between liberty and grace. (Note written August, 1934.) 

83 



of containing; only we must clearly see that the container is not the 
haver. The haver is the subject in so far as it carries with it a con- 
tainer; it is almost impossible to put it precisely. At the root of 
'having', then, there is an immediate term which causes 'something* 
to participate in its own immediacy. In fact it seems to me that 
corporeity (as I called it yesterday) is involved in having just as 
corporeity implies what we may call historicity. A body is a his- 
tory, or more accurately it is the outcome, the fixation of a history. 
I cannot therefore say that I have a body, at least not properly 
speaking, but the mysterious relation uniting me to my body is at 
the foundation of all my powers of having. 

I have a feeling that much could be drawn from this in treating 
the far more concrete problems which have occupied my thoughts 
in these latter times, because of the connection between non-disposa- 
bility and having. Having is a sort of signpost of possible non- 
disposability. The dead man is the man who no longer has any- 
thing (at least if we take the word 'have* in those senses which we 
can make precise). We are tempted to think that no longer having 
anything is the same as no longer being anything: and in fact the 
general trend of life on the natural level is to identify one's-self with 
what one has: and here the ontological category tends to be blotted 
out. But the reality of sacrifice is there somehow to prove to us in 
fact that being can assert its transcendency over having. There lies 
the deepest significance of martyrdom considered as witness: it is the 
witness. 

The reflection which I have followed out this evening seems to 
me to be of the first importance: it gives us the most concrete possible 
way of understanding the ontological problem. But we must still 
take note that this negation of having, or rather of the correlation 
between having and being, cannot be separated from an affirmation 
on which it hangs. Here I will stop as I am seeing less clearly. 

I am sure of this, anyhow: of the hidden identity of the way 

84 



which leads to holiness and the road which leads the metaphysician 
to the affirmation of Being; also that it is necessary above all, for a 
concrete philosophy, to realise that here is one and the same road. 
I would add that the significance of human trials, especially illness 
and death, and their ontological bearing, is here made plain. Only 
it is an essential character of such trials that they can be misunder- 
stood. They are an appeal to a power of interpretation or assimila- 
tion which is identical with freedom itself. 1 

March 3 ist 

Suffering: surely this is being touched in point of what we have, 
in so far as what we have has become an integral part of what we 
are? Physical suffering to be regarded as the prototype or root of all 
suffering. 

Coming back from my walk I was wondering what we mean 
by 'having an idea*. I think there is a difficulty here. But even here 
I think that the process may be compared to a graft which is made 
upon a growing thing ('grafting upon* expresses my meaning much 
better than 'integration into'): that which grows tends, if not to 
think of itself as a vehicle, at least to seem to itself to be endowed with 
a vehicle. 

But we might perhaps think that corporeity is not necessarily 
implied in the reality of this 'growing* or 'living* principle. Is our 
'absolute having* of our bodies (which is, by the way, no 'having* 
at all) really a condition of a spiritual 'having* such as I referred to 
above? I cannot yet see the answer clearly, or rather I cannot manage 
to put the question in terms which seem fully intelligible even to 
myself. Yet it looks as if, here too, I have come back to the basic 
problem of attention, which has so much occupied my mind in the 
past. 

1 1 think I should here point out the fundamental agreement between 
these views and those of Jaspers, which I did not know in 193 1. (Note 
written August, 1934.) 

85 



This I do sec: that the privilege or primacy which I ascribe to my 
mental equipment, and to what belongs to it, is conceived or 
imagined by analogy with the fundamental and unthinkable 
privilege which distinguishes my body in so far as it is mine. In this 
privilege my ideas, in so far as they are mine, have an indirect share. 

Would it make sense to say that having and being are, as it were, 
essential concentrations of space and time? I am not sure. 

April ytb 

I shall not pursue this line of thought. 

One thing is plain to me. Having is always the way in which I 
give suffering a hold upon me: but surely this is because having is 
in fact multiplicity? A being wholly simple, that is, entirely one, 
could not be subject to suffering. 1 But can this absolute simplicity 

1 None of the great metaphysicians of the past was ignorant of this 
truth: but it can disguise serious ambiguities. It is, for instance, quite 
clear that there is in fact a zone on the hither side of suffering. One can 
imagine, or rather conceive of, a being who is too rudimentary, too 
essentially undifFerentiated, to be capable of suffering. But would it then 
still be a being? It is obvious (to me) that the condition, to which all the 
sages of all time and of every country urge us to raise ourselves, has 
nothing to do with such a unity as this. The difference is basically the 
same as the difference between the One and matter in Plotinus. But 
words are fundamentally unsuitable for stating this difference clearly, for 
the simple reason that they belong to the realm of discursive thought, and 
therefore we continually run the risk of falling into a confusion here 
which may have incalculable consequences; and if I am completely 
honest, I must recognise that I cannot avoid asking whether this confu- 
sion does not really spoil a certain type of asceticism, at least in some 
degree. We have here a group of questions to be boldly attacked after 
wiping all the traditional formulae right off the slate. We must never lose 
sight of the fact that salvation can only be found in plenitude, though of 
course we shall admit that a certain kind of richness, under whatever 
forms it appears, is so far from bringing us to salvation that it even with- 
draws us from it. But the problem in fact is how to pass through multipli- 
city so as to transcend it, and not at all how to escape it. (Note written 
August, 1934-) 

86 



be realised? It seems to me that there may be pseudo-mysticism here, 
a source of very serious difficulties. 

April 8th 

Metaphysics considered as a means of exorcising despair. 

There is one philosophy which clearly claims to exorcise hope 
and despair at the same time; I mean that of Spinoza. I chiefly 
blame him for fundamentally ignoring the temporal structure of 
human existence. The Bergsonian position on this level seems to me 
impregnable. 

I was thinking to myself this evening that I shall have to consider 
the need for an absolute evaluation, the need to be judged. (Cf. the 
conclusion of Un Homme de Dieu.) 

April loth 

I see the clear necessity, this morning, of substituting the question 
'Am I my life?' for 'Am I my body?' My body, if deprived of 
motion, is just my corpse. Now my corpse is essentially what I am 
not, and what I cannot be (and this is what we mean when we say 
of a dead man, 'he is no more'). But when I assert that I have a 
body, it is clear that I am really tending in fact to immobilise this 
body in some fashion and almost to devitalise it. I wonder now if 
having qua having does not always imply in some degree a devitali- 
sation of this kind, in exact proportion as it corresponds to an 
incipient thraldom. 

The difficulty is to understand how it can be metaphysically 
false to say 'I am my life' without its being legitimate to conclude 
from thence 'I have my life' or 'I have a life'. Here we return, I 
think, to my reflections of March 27th. I have only the absolute 
disposal of my life (we will no longer say, of my body) if I put 
myself in such a condition that I can never dispose of it again; here 
we meet the irrevocable. This is strikingly obvious in the case of 

87 



suicide or the sacrifice of life, but it is really just as true of any act 
at all. 

But the notion of irrevocability must be examined and expanded, 
otherwise the difference between suicide and sacrifice becomes un- 
intelligible and even unthinkable. This difference entirely depends 
on hope. There is not, and there cannot be, any sacrifice without 
hope, and a sacrifice which excluded hope would be suicide. Here 
the question of disinterestedness arises. But we must make up our 
minds whether it is legitimate to identify disinterestedness and 
despair. It is true that the claim will certainly be made that where 
I hope for myself there can be no question of disinterestedness, but 
only where my hope is fixed on an order or a cause for whose good 
I give myself up. But it is our duty to ask if the meaning of the 
expression Tor myself* is as clear as it seems, or rather as clear as we 
are at first inclined to say. And here we shall in fact have to proceed 
in rather the same way as I did on March i5th: we shall first have 
to discover the nature of this hope for ones- self, and then (a deeper 
question) the nature of the for ones-self which remains at the heart of 
sacrifice. 1 

1 The revolutionary who consents to die for the revolution, the party, 
etc., identifies himself with that for which he gives his life. And accord- 
ingly the party or the revolution becomes, for him, 'more myself than I am 
myself/ This is the adherence, this the identification which is at the heart 
of his act and gives it meaning. Someone will say: 'Yes, but he makes no 
claim to see the triumph of the cause for which he gives himself, no claim 
to enjoy it and so profit by it; and therefore he renounces all reward, all 
recompense. Whereas the Christian, for instance, fancies that he will 
himself be personally associated with the victory that he helps to prepare 
for, and so thinks that he will be in some way able to profit by it. You 
cannot therefore speak of disinterestedness in his case/ 

The whole question depends on discovering what precise value we may 
attribute to the act by which, anticipating what I call my own annihila- 
tion, I nevertheless devote myself to preparing for a state of affairs sub- 
sequent to it, a state which 1 declare myself unable to enjoy. And here it 
seems that there are mistakes and illusions in plenty. 'I shall not enjoy it/ 

88 



April i2th 

I now take up once more my idea about the ontological hazard, 
life as implying a certain hazard which does not belong to the order 
of life. It is obvious that there is one type of experience which is by 
no means capable of confirming the notion. It is an essential element 
of this hazard that it can be denied; we might well ask what sense 
this denial would have. 

This hazard I propose to call by the name of Soul. It is one of the 
essentials of the soul thus conceived that it may be saved or lost, 
precisely in so far as it is a hazard. This is worthy of notice, and 

I say. And yet in a way I do enjoy it in advance; this enjoyment is at least 
as much the object of my anticipation as is my own destruction; what is 
more, it may be that this enjoyment is the only thing I do anticipate; for 
my destruction, as such, is just a void, and in so far as it is a void is not 
able to be anticipated. Still more, the idea that I shall no longer exist 
may increase my enjoyment, may clothe it in an element of pride or vanity 
which gives the enjoyment a sharper quality. But and this is the crucial 
thing this is just my present state, and not at all the question of whether 
I shall survive. My much-boasted disinterestedness seems to me, from 
this point of view, to contain an element of pride, or rather of defiance, 
which perhaps spoils it. How do I meet the hostile reality which is about 
to annihilate me? First I snap my fingers at it, then I claim to contribute 
in my own person to its shaping. Contrary to what we often think, there 
is no less humble attitude than this, nor any that implies a haughtier 
claim. 

Our critics will no doubt return to the charge, saying that the revolu- 
tionary, for instance, who does not believe in his own immortality, does 
recognise ipso facto that he himself is unimportant, and that his personality 
is unimportant. But I think that is really just a displacement of what I 
will call his moral centre of gravity. The cause for which he devotes 
himself, as cause, is itself only an element of his own personality regarded 
as absolute. 

They will say again, 'The sacrifice which is inspired by the hope of a 
recompense thereby ceases to be a sacrifice/ Obviously. But how false 
and how shallow is the psychology which represents the sacrifice of a 
believer as the result of calculation! Such sacrifice is carried on the stream, 
as it were, of hope and love. This does not detract from its value, far 
from it; and the contrary can only be maintained by those who cling to a 

89 



clearly connected with the fact that the soul is not an object and 
can by no means be regarded as an object. For an object, the fact of 
being lost or retained ('saved* would be meaningless) remains 
accidental with regard to its own nature, which can be regarded as 
unaffected by the fact that the object is or is not lost (for instance a 
piece of jewellery). 

This must be related with what I have written on 'having*. 

On the one hand my soul seems to me that to which the re- 
lation (?) implied in the fact of 'having* seems least applicable; it is, 
of everything in the world, the least comparable to a possession. 

hyper-Kantian moral formalism which would go so far as to eliminate 
the postulates of practical reason. And anyhow everything leads us to 
think that where neither the love of God nor the love of one's neighbour 
comes in, the real factor is the love of self; and that is a fundamental 
pretension to which we see no reason to grant an intrinsic value. I 
realise, of course, that some religious writers may have involuntarily 
helped to obscure the essential issues, by seeming to set up a scale of 
merits, which would have the effect of absolutely ruining the idea of 
sacrifice taken in its pure sense, that is to say, as consecration. I think we 
must begin with the idea of the consecrated soul if we are to dispose of these 
hoary misunderstandings. We then see that the soul which is consecrated 
is also indwelt with an unconquerable hope; she aspires to enter into an 
intimacy with her God, an intimacy ever greater, ever more complete. 
She has no reason to think that there can be any merit quite the contrary 
in her fighting against this aspiration. For this very reason, that she 
knows herself to be barren of intrinsic worth, that she knows that she 
derives from God whatever is positive within her so that in disregarding 
herself she is disparaging God's gift, and incurring the shame of mon- 
strous ingratitude. What worth could we see in the fact of a son's refusing 
to believe that his father loves him? This mistake begins from the moment 
when the creature begins to assign rights to himself and to treat himself as 
a creditor. It is more than an alteration, it is a radical perversion. But let 
us not forget that the unbeliever also often thinks of himself as the creditor 
of a God who will not pay, and this is serious in a different way. 

We have here, I think, the elements of a criterion for judging whether 
the belief in immortality has any religious value in it or not: the whole 
question is whether it looks like an act of faith and love, or like an arroga- 
tion rooted in the concern for self. (Note written August, 1934.) 

90 



On the other hand, its possible loss is, as it were, the reverse side 
or disastrous counterpart of all possession. 

But then it would seem that the soul is that which can least of all 
be lost. 

This apparent contradiction allows us to unmask an ambiguity 
bound up in the very notion of loss. Could we not say that there is 
a loss on the level of Being 1 (it is in this sense and on this level that 
the soul can be lost) and also a loss on the level of having which 
is related to the actual nature of objects? But we should observe at 
the same time (this is of prime importance) that every loss in the 
order of having constitutes athreat to what I have called the 

1 Loss on the level of being is, properly speaking, perdition. Yet we 
must recognise that this distinction does not give a full account of the 
reality, which is curiously complex. For a clearer view, the reader should 
doubtless refer to indications already given on integrity with regard to 
hope. Hope (one cannot repeat too often) can only take root where 
perdition is a possibility, and it is the most instructive exercise imaginable 
to note that in this respect no distinction need be made between the order 
of life properly speaking, and the order of the soul. It is equally legitimate 
to hope for the recovery of a sick person and the return of the prodigal 
son. In both cases the hope is bent on the re-establishment of an order 
accidentally upset. We can go further; there is a sense in which even the 
recovery of something lost may admit of hope. But it can clearly be seen 
that there is here a sort of descending scale with hope at one end of it in 
its most fervent form, deeply rooted in God, and, at the other end, hope 
at its most selfish and superstitious; it would be extremely interesting 
somehow to follow the steps of this downward scale. Following this line, 
we should see clearly that the more the loss is related to possession, the 
more the protest it inspires looks like the assertion of a right; and the atti- 
tude of the man who makes this protest, who asserts this claim, propor- 
tionally ceases to be identified with hope in its pure state as defined above. 
Indeed, it may be that genuine hope always consists in awaiting a certain 
grace, the nature of whose power we may not clearly define to ourselves, 
but to whose bounty we think we can assign no end. Hope is centred in 
our consciousness of this beneficent power; whereas standing on one's 
rights is a thing which revolves, by definition, round the consciousness of 
self and its dues. (Note written August, 1934.) 

91 



soul and runs the risk of turning into a loss on the level of being: 
we return here to the problem of despair and what I wrote about 
death (March jotfy. 

My life. The fact that it can seem to me to be literally devoid of 
meaning is an integral part of its structure. It then appears to me 
as pure accident. But then, what is this T which finds itself in- 
comprehensibly dowered with this absurd existence, dowered with 
something which is the very reverse of a gift? It is irresistibly driven 
to self-negation: this life can have been given by nobody, it is in 
reality the life of nobody. No doubt this thorough-going nihilism 
is just an extreme position, a position very difficult to hold and 
implying a kind of heroism. But here we are deep in contradictions, 
since this heroism, if it is experienced and recognised as such, 
immediately re-establishes the subject, and at the same time restores 
to existence the meaning that was denied to it; it does at least in fact 
exhibit one value; it serves as a springboard for the consciousness 
which denies it. And so, for the initial position to be maintained, 
it must not be made explicit, but instead be reduced to an auto- 
anaesthesia which, though it can take all sorts of different forms in 
concrete^ yet remains in reality identical with itself as regards its 
essential characteristics. 

Someone will object that the refusal to treat one's life as a hazard 
is not necessarily the same thing as abandonment to this state of 
anaesthesia and voluntary passivity. But just because life is being 
treated as an absolute (as something which does not exist in relation 
to anything else) it may at least be a recognition of the right to set 
one's-self free of it if certain conditions are not realised. Here the 
data become extremely complex. Life is really being identified with 
a kind of plenitude, a kind of expansiveness. When this plenitude 
or expansiveness is not forthcoming, such a life loses its intrinsic 
justification. I have grounds for saying that there is nothing to do 
but destroy myself. What is this T? It is my life, which is this time 

92 



ranged against itself and which has the amazing privilege of self- 
negation. It seems to follow from this that the thought of suicide 
dwells at the very heart of a life which is thought of and willed 
without a hazard (just as divorce is always kept within call when 
it arises from a union which implies no vow and has not been 
entered upon before anyone, and I think this parallel might be 
carried a long way). 1 

We cannot hope to find even there the clue for a purely logical 
refutation of the thesis upheld by the champions of suicide. Nothing 
will force us to conceive of the hazard; no objective reason can be 
found to stop us from killing ourselves. We are here at the common 
root of freedom and of faith. 

December gib, 1931 

I return to the problem of hope. It seems to me that the conditions 
that make it possible to hope are strictly the same as those which 
make it possible to despair. Death considered as the springboard^of 
an absolute hope. A world where death was missing would be a 
world where hope only existed in the larval stage. 

December ioth f 1931 

I was writing to L yesterday after reading his remarkable 

analysis of idealism: hope is to desire what patience is to passivity. 
This seems to me very important. Patience: I was thinking this 

I 1 still think this parallel could be carried a long way, and that it is of a 
nature to throw greater light on the meaning of the Christian idea of the 
indissolubility of marriage. While thinking of this connection one might 
be led on to make this fact clear; that for a metaphysic of freedom and 
fidelity, the marriage tie has a substantial reality of its own, like what we 
call the union of the body and soul. To be quite honest, however, I must 
admit that this way of thinking makes me a little uneasy, and I find it 
hard to reconcile the lessons of experience (as I should be tempted to call 
them) with demands in the order of metaphysic and theology. (Note 
written August, 1934.) 

93 



open; one can even say that the world is so constructed that absolute 
despair appears possible in it. Things are constantly happening 
which counsel us, or so one would think, to drown ourselves in 
despair. This is of the first importance. 

Fidelity considered as the recognition of something permanent. 
We are now beyond the opposition between understanding and 
feeling. The recognition of Ulysses by Eumaeus, of Christ on the 
road to Emmaus, etc., etc. The idea of an ontological permanence 
the permanence of that which lasts, of that which implies history, 
as opposed to the permanence of an essence or a formal arrange- 
ment. 

Witness considered as the beginning of things the Church a 
perpetuated witness, an act of fidelity. 

October 6th 

. It is an essential characteristic of the being to whom I give my 
fidelity to be not only liable to be betrayed, but also in some manner 
affected by my betrayal. Fidelity regarded as witness perpetuated; 
but it is of the essence of witness that it can be obliterated and 
wiped out. Must see how this obliteration can happen. Perhaps we 
think that witness is outworn, and no longer corresponds to reality. 
Being is, as it were, attested. The senses are witnesses this is 
important, and I think new: systematically ignored by idealism. 

October ?tb 

The consideration arises: Is the object to which I have vowed 
myself worthy of my being consecrated to its service? The compara- 
tive values of causes. 

Consider creative fidelity, a fidelity only safeguarded by being 
creative. Is its creative power in proportion to its ontological worth? 

Fidelity can only be shown towards a person, never at all to a 
notion or an ideal. An absolute fidelity involves an absolute person. 

96 



Question: docs not an absolute fidelity to a creature presuppose Him 
in whose sight I bind myself (as in the sacrament of marriage)? 

It is not enough to say that we live in a world where betrayal is 
possible at every moment and in every form: betrayal of all by all 
and of each by himself. I repeat, this betrayal seems pressed upon us 
by the very shape of our world. The spectacle of death is a perpetual 
invitation to deny. The essence of our world is perhaps betrayal. 
But still, if we proclaim this betrayal, are not we becoming its 
accomplices? 

Memory an ontological sign. 1 Inseparable from witness. Is it not 
the essence of man to be a being who can bear witness? 

The problem of the metaphysical foundation of witness is obvi- 
ously as central as any. Not elucidated. 'I was there, I assert that I 
was there/ The whole of history is the function of a witness which 
it prolongs: in this sense history is rooted in religion. 

While I was walking about just now between the Pantheon and 
the Boulevard Raspail, a great many other things came into my 
head. My brain feels amazingly fertile. 

I was thinking, too, of the Rite, as giving rhythm to fidelity, and 
of the betrayal which lurks in the very heart of religious practice 
under the form of habit. This is relevant to my notes this morning 
about creative fidelity. Surely this is, besides, the very definition of 
saintliness? 

I also begin to realise the deeper meaning of piety towards the 
dead, taken as the refusal to betray a person who has existed by 
treating him just as no longer existing. It is an active protest against 
a kind of trick of appearances, a refusal to yield to it or to lend one's 
self wholeheartedly to the game. If you say 'they no longer exist* f 
you are not only denying them, you are also denying yourself and 
perhaps making an absolute denial. 

1 Telepathy is surely in regard to space what memory is in regard to 
time. It is beside the point that telepathy only appears in flashes. 

c 97 M.B.H. 



I believe that at last I have begun to see the possibility of examin- 
ing the very idea of proving the existence of God, with regard to the 
Thomist proofs. It is a fact that they are not universally convincing. 
How can we explain their partial ineffectiveness? The arguments 
presuppose that we have already grounded ourselves on God, and 
what they are really doing is to bring to the level of discursive 
thought an act of a wholly different kind. These, I believe, are not 
ways, but blind ways, as one can have blind windows. 

Thinking of all this, I began to wonder whether my instrument 
of thought is a reflexive intuition, whose nature should be defined 
more closely. 

Perhaps we are living in a specially favourable period for religion, 
because that betrayal whose home is the world is now shown in its 
true light. The fundamental illusions of the nineteenth century are 
now dispelled. 

October 8th 

'Reflexive intuition' is certainly not a happy expression. But 
what I mean is this. It seems to me that I am bound to admit that I 
am anyhow on one level of myself face to face with Being. In a 
sense I see it. In another sense I cannot say that I see it since I cannot 
grasp myself in the act of seeing it. The intuition is not, and cannot 
be, directly reflected in consciousness. But in turning towards its 
object, it sheds light upon a whole world of thoughts which lie 
beneath it. Metaphysically speaking, I do not see how else we can 
account for faith. It seems to me that this all comes very near to 
being Alexandrine theology, but I must make sure of this. I think 
that an intuition of this sort lies at the root of all fidelity, but its 
reality is always open to question. I can always say 'Yes, I thought 
I saw this, but I was mistaken*. 

Am very much absorbed by the question of witness. Is not the 
province of witness the province of experience at large? Today we 

98 



tend to think too little of witness and just to see in it the more or less 
accurate report of an Erlebnis. But if witness is only that, it is 
nothing, it is impossible; for absolutely nothing can guarantee that 
the Erlebnis will be capable of survival or confirmation. Compare 
what I said yesterday the world the home of betrayal (conscious or 
unconscious), and knowing itself to be so with an ever-increasing 
clarity. 

October ^tb 

It is possible for pure reason to attack witness in toto, and to pre- 
tend that no valid witness can really be produced. It is of the essence 
of particular witness that it should be capable of being doubted. 
We are tempted to extend this suspicion to all possible witness, to 
witness in itself. Is this proceedure really justifiable? Surely only 
justifiable if we are capable of defining a priori those conditions 
which a witness should fulfil if it is to be recognised as valid and of 
showing furthermore that such conditions are not realised or, at the 
very least, that they cannot be shown to be realised. But here, as in 
the case of doubting one's existence, the issue is nothing less than 
the question of a root-and-branch devaluation both of memory and 
of all translation into conceptual terms of this Erlebnis, which is in 
itself inexpressible. 

Surely it is of the essence of anything ontological that it can be 
no more than attested? 

But the attestation must be the thought of itself; it can only be 
justified in the heart of Being and in reference to Being. In a world 
where Erlebnis is everything, in a world of simple instants, the 
attestation disappears; but then how can it be attestation if attesta- 
tion is appearance? 

October loth 

Attestation is a personal thing; it brings the personality into play, 

99 



but it is at the same time turned towards Being, and is characterised 
by this tension between the personal and the ontological factors. 

And yet, in all this I find something unsatisfactory; and I still 
cannot manage to formulate it in my own mind. I do see clearly, 
however, that I am in complete opposition to such attitudes as 
Griscbach's; I see in memory one essential aspect of the ontological 
assertion. How much nearer I feel to Bergson in this regard, and 
also to St. Augustine! What is witness in Bergson? surely a con- 
secration. But the very notion of consecration is an ambiguous one, 
and we must beware of interpreting it in a pragmatist sense. 

Notice that attesting means not only witnessing but also calling 
to witness. There is an essential triad-relation here. This in the sense 
of die Journal Me'taphysique. 1 

October 22nd 

THE POSITION OF THE ONTOLOGICAL MYSTERY: 
ITS CONCRETE APPROACHES. 

This is the proposed title for my paper to the Marseilles Philoso- 
phical Society. The phrase 'mystery of being, ontological mystery' 
as against 'problem of being, ontological problem 9 has suddenly 
come to me in these last few days. It has enlightened me. 

Metaphysical thought reflection trained on mystery. 

But it is an essential part of a mystery that it should be acknow- 
ledged; metaphysical reflection presupposes this acknowledgment, 
which is outside its own sphere. 

Distinguish between the Mysterious and the Problematic. A 
problem is something met with which bars my passage. It is before 
me in its entirety. A mystery, on the other hand, is something in 
which I find myself caught up, and whose essence is therefore not 
to be before me in its entirety. It is as though in this province the 
distinction between in me and before me loses its meaning. 

1 Sec Journal Mttapbysique, p. 145. (Translator's note.) 
100 



The Natural. The province of the Natural is the same as the 
province of the Problematic. We are tempted to ttwrn mystery into 
problem. 

The Mysterious and Ontological are identical. There is a mystery 
of knowledge which belongs to the ontological order (as Maritain 
saw) but the epistemologist does not know this, makes a point of 
ignoring it, and turns it into a problem. 

A typical example: the 'problem of evil*. I treat evil as an acci- 
dent befalling a certain mechanism which is the universe itself, but 
before which I suppose myself placed. Thereby I treat myself, not 
only as immune to the disease or weakness, but also as someone 
standing outside the universe and claiming to put it together (at 
least in thought) in its entirety. 

But what access can I have to ontology as such? The very notion 
of access here is obviously inapplicable. It only has meaning in a 
problematic enquiry. If a certain place has already been plotted out, 
the question is then, how can I gain access to it. Impossible to treat 
being in this way. 

Presence and mystery equivalent probe further into this. 

Predisposition for revelation. Whereas in a world-picture con- 
structed from a problematic point of view, revelation appears to be 
supererogatory. 

It follows from my definition of metaphysical thought as reflection 
trained upon mystery, that progress in this sort of thinking is not 
really conceivable. There is only progress in problematic thought. 

It is a proper character of problems, moreover, to be reduced to 
detail. Mystery, on the other hand, is something which cannot be 
reduced to detail. 



October 

A first question of the phenomenological order: whence comes 
the almost insuperable suspicion aroused by all researches into 

101 



being in most minds, even those most inclined to metaphysic? I 
doubt if the right answer is to cite the persistent influence of Kant- 
ianism upon intellectuals: it has in fact considerably diminished. To 
tell the truth, Bergsonianism has here acted in the same way as 
Kantianism. I think that we really find a feeling which as a rule we 
could not formulate, but which I will try to describe by saying that 
we become more and more convinced that, strictly speaking, there 
is no problem of Being and no problematic approach to it: I believe 
that if we examined the very idea 'problem* more closely, that would 
be enough to convince us. A considerable hindrance here is the 
fact that we have acquired the execrable habit of considering the 
problems in themselves, that is, in abstraction from the manner in 
which their appearance is woven into the very texture of life. A 
scientist is privileged in this respect. A scientific problem arises at a 
given point in his research, it is something the mind stumbles upon 
as the foot stumbles upon a stone. Any problem whatever implies 
the provisional breaking-offof a continuity which the mind has to / 
re-establish. 

October 31 st 

Consider Being as the principle of inexhaustibility. Joy is bound 
up with a feeling of something inexhaustible, as Nietzsche saw. 
Return to my former remark on Being, that it is resistance to critical 
dissolution. This links up with my remarks on despair. A knotty 
point. The place of despair is where we can make an inventory (where 
we can say 'I have made my reckoning, and I shall not have the means 
of doing', etc.). But Being is above all inventories. Despair is, so to 
speak, the shock felt by the mind when it meets with 'There is no 
more*. 'Whatever comes to an end is too short* (St. Augustine). 

But this principle of inexhaustibility is itself neither a charac- 
teristic nor a series of characteristics: here we return to the opposition 
between mystery and problem which I described above. 

102 



November ist 

Space and time considered as manifestations of inexhaustibility. 1 
The universe as the dehiscence of Being? A notion worth trying. 
Every individual being in so far as it is a closed-up thing (though 

infinite) is a symbol or expression of the ontological mystery. 

November jtb 

Start from the uneasiness felt before the problem of Being, when 
it is stated in theoretical terms, and also the impossibility for us of 
not stating it on this level. 

The technical correlated to the problematic; every genuine prob- 
lem is subject to its own technique, and every technique consists in 
resolving problems of a determinate type. Can we posit hypo- 
thetically a metaproblematic, metatechnical sphere? 

November 8tb 

Deeper reflection on the idea of a problem leads us to ask if there 
is not a touch of contradiction in the very act of posing a problem 
of being. 

Philosophy on its metacritical side is directed towards a meta- 
problematic inquiry. 

The need to restore its ontological weight to human experience. 

The metaproblematic the peace that passeth all understanding 
eternity. 

November gtb 

Must scrutinise the meaning of what I called the ontological 
weight of human experience; here Jaspers may be useful. 

Analyse such a formula as: 

1 But elsewhere I define them as paired modes of absence. There is a 
whole dialectic to be drawn from this, and it lies at the heart of both 
travel and history. (Note written October 8th, 1934.) 

103 



'I am only what I am worth (but I am worth nothing)/ a 
philosophy which has its issue in despair and can only be disguised 
by a carefully preserved illusion. 

The fact that despair is possible is a central datum here. Man is 
capable of despair, capable of hugging death, of hugging his own 
death. A central datum for metaphysic, but such definitions of 
man as that proposed by Thomism cover it up and disguise it. The 
essential merit of Kierkegaard and his school, to my mind, is their 
having brought this datum into full view. And metaphysic ought 
to take up its position just there, face to face with despair. The 
ontological problem cannot be separated from that of despair. (But 
they are not problems.) 

Must think about the problem of the reality of other selves. It 
seems to me that the problem can be stated in such a way as to 
exclude in advance any solution which can be accepted or even 
understood; that is, by centring my reality on my consciousness of 
myself. If we begin, like Descartes, by assuming that my essence is 
self-consciousness, there is no longer a way out. 

November nth 

Not only do we have a right to assert that others exist, but I 
should be inclined to contend that existence can be attributed only 
to others, and in virtue of their otherness, and that I cannot think 
of myself as existing except in so far as I conceive of myself as not 
being the others: and so as other than them. I would go so far as to 
say that it is of the essence of the Other that he exists. I cannot think 
of him as other without thinking of him as existing. Doubt 
only arises when his otherness is, so to say, expunged from my 
mind. 

I would go so far as to ask if the cogito (whose incurable ambigu- 
ity can never be too clearly exposed) does not really mean: 'when I 
think, I am standing back from myself, I am raising myself up 

104 



before myself as other, and I therefore appear as existent/ Such a 
conception as this is radically opposed to the idealism which defines 
the self as self-conscioihness. Would it be absurd to say that the 
self in so far as it is self-consciousness is only sulexistent? It only 
exists in so far as it treats itself as being for another, with reference 
to another; and therefore in so far as it recognises that it eludes 
itself. 

People will say: 'These assertions are as ambiguous in their real 
content as they are arbitrary in their form. What existence do you 
speak of? Empirical existence or metaphysical existence? Empirical 
existence is denied by none; but it has a phenomenal character, for 
nothing will stop the others from being my thought of the others. And 
then the problem has merely shifted its ground/ But I think that it 
is just this position with which we should refuse to have anything 
to do. If I admit that the others are only my thought of the others ; my 
idea of the others, it becomes utterly impossible to break the circle 
one has begun by drawing round one's-self. If you posit the primacy 
of subject-object the primacy of the category subject-object or of 
the act by which the subject sets up objects somehow or other 
within itself, the existence of others becomes unthinkable. And so 
does any existence whatever; there is no doubt of that. 

Self-consciousness and the He: the philosophy of self-conscious- 
ness. In this the others are truly outside a sort of circle which I form 
with myself. From this point of view, I have no power of making 
contact with them; the very idea of communication is impossible. 
I cannot help regarding this intra-subjective reality of the others as 
the emerging of an absolutely mysterious and for ever impalpable 
X. We have here, in a general form, the most abstract features of 
Proust's world, though one also finds hints in Proust which are not 
only different from these but even contradictory. These hints be- 
come more scattered as the book goes on, as the circle formed by the 
Me and itself becomes more marked and more enclosed. At Com- 

105 



bray and in everything to do with Combray the circle still does not 
exist. There is a possible place for the Thou. But as the book 
develops, as the experience it describes is hardened, sharpened and 
elaborated, the Thou is banished from the story. This is decisively 
and terribly apparent in the passage about the death of the grand- 
mother. (I must say that I think we are here going far beyond the 
conscious knowledge which it was in Proust's power to arrive at 
about either his work or himself.) 

People will say again, 'But this distinction between the Thou 
and the He only applies to mental attitudes: it is phenomenological 
in the most exclusive sense of the word. Do you claim to give a 
metaphysical basis to this distinction, or a metaphysical validity to 
the Thou?' 

The sense of the question is the really difficult thing to explain 
and elucidate. Let us try to state it more clearly, like this, for 
example. When I treat another as a Thou and no longer as a He, 
does this difference of treatment qualify me alone and my attitude 
to this other, or can I say that by treating him as a Thou I pierce 
more deeply into him and apprehend his being or his essence more 
directly? 

Here again we must be careful. If by 'piercing more deeply' or 
'apprehending his essence more directly', we mean reaching a more 
exact knowledge, a knowledge that is in some sense more objective, 
then we must certainly reply 'No'. In this respect, if we cling to a 
mode of objective definition, it will always be in our power to say 
that the Thou is an illusion. But nonce that the term essence is itself 
extremely ambiguous; by essence we can understand either a nature 
or a freedom. It is perhaps of my essence qua freedom to be able to 
conform myself or not to my essence qua nature. It may be of my 
essence to be able not to be what I am; in plain words, to be able to 
betray myself. Essence qua nature is not what I reach in the Thou. 
In fact if I treat the Thou as a He, I reduce the other to being only 

106 



nature; an animated object which works in some ways and not in 
others. If, on the contrary, I treat the other as Thou, I treat him and 
apprehend him qua freedom. I apprehend him qua freedom because 
he is also freedom, and is not only nature. What is more, I help 
him, in a sense, to be freed, I collaborate with his freedom. The 
formula sounds paradoxical and self-contradictory, but love is 
always proving it true. On the other hand, he is really other qua free- 
dom; in fact qua nature he appears to me identical with what I am 
myself qua nature. On this side, no doubt, and only on this side, I 
can work on him by suggestion (there is an alarming and frequent 
confusion between the workings of love and the workings of 
suggestion). 

And so light is thrown on this morning's formulae. The other, 
in so far as he is other, only exists for me in so far as I am open to 
him, in so far as he is a Thou. But I am only open to him in so far 
as I cease to form a circle with myself, inside which I somehow 
place the other, or rather his idea; for inside this circle the other 
becomes the idea of the other, and the idea of the other is no longer 
the other qua other, but the other qua related to me; and in this condi- 
tion he is uprooted and taken to bits, or at least in process of being 
taken to bits. 

November ijtb 

Everything that can be enunciated is thinkable or, more accu- 
rately, there is nothing we can enunciate which some of us cannot 
also believe or think at a given moment. The resources of language 
can be compared at all points to an extremely efficient network of 
communications. But travelling round is in itself nothing. And 
discourse for the sake of discourse is less than nothing. 

These observations were suggested by some sort of aesthetic 
pseudo-appreciations I have forgotten now what they were. But 
alas! they are also applicable to a great deal of pseudo-metaphysics. 

107 



November i$tb 

Are there grounds which justify us in assuming the priority of 
the act by which the I builds up its own self-hood over the act by 
which it posits the reality of others? And if we are to accept this 
priority, how are we to understand it? It can be conceived either in 
an empirical or a transcendental sense. Empirically my province 
consists of the sum of my states of consciousness; this province has 
the distinctive characteristic of being felt, and of being my province 
in so far as it is felt. This seems clear enough, but it is not really at 
all clear; the appearance of clarity is entirely due, in my opinion, to 
a sort of materialist representation which underlies these formulae. 
Instead of concentrating on thinking of the felt as felt, we put in its 
place the idea of an organic event, something which 'goes on* in the 
allegedly perfectly distinct and limited sphere which I call my body. 
I believe that at the bottom of all empiricist notions of the primacy 
of self-consciousness, there really lies the rudimentary idea that 
everything that is for me must first pass through my body: there is 
this idea of my body as an absolute intermediary. The supporters of 
this theory do not dream of making an out-and-out effort to dis- 
cover what order the body-self relationship belongs to, nor yet do 
they ask the meaning of the mental act by which I assert that this 
body is my body. It is possible though I would not go so far as to 
assert it that there is a vicious circle here, and that we cannot avoid 
passing {torn feeling to a certain representation of my body, in order 
that we may later explain, in terms of feeling, the privilege in virtue 
of which my body is my body. I am inclined to think that if one 
wants to keep to the empirical point of view, there can be no 
question of going beyond the assertion 'this body', and that the 
expression 'my body* only looks like a source of unintelligibility 
and radical irrationality. 

It is quite different if we take what I called the transcendental 
point of view. 

108 



November i6th 

Notice that one kind of philosophy of Life constitutes an obstacle 
to meditation on Being. The meditation is in danger of appearing 
to develop beyond or below the philosophy. These first notes are 
essential and give us the key. 

'The hiding* I wrote 'of my being from my consciousness by 
something which is not and cannot be given to me.' My life cannot 
be given to me; and in spite of appearances, my body cannot be 
given to me either, in so far as my life is incarnate in it. My body is 
not, and cannot be, an object in the sense that an apparatus exterior 
to myself is an object. There is a tendency to minimise as much as 
possible the difference between my body and an apparatus belong- 
ing to me (e.g. a watch). Americans have themselves 'checked up* 
in clinics. A revealing phrase. In practice you can go as far as you 
like in that direction, but there is always something that escapes the 
checking-up; there are accidents, etc. 

As soon as distinction has been made between my life and my 
being, there is an almost irresistible temptation to set a problem 
about this being, and to wonder in what it consists: and every 
effort to picture it forces us to sketch this problem or pseudo- 
problem. 

The question 'what am I?' seems to demand an answer that can 
be conceptualised; but at the same time, every answer that can be, 
seems in danger of being rejected or of falling short. 

But is this a legitimate question? Here it becomes necessary to 
specify: the more I adhere to my actions, my social surroundings, 
etc., the less does this question really arise for me. I can always 
formulate it, but it does not ring true. The true question, the one 
which rings full and clear, so to say, the true question presupposes 
a certain detachment or separation of myself from what I do and 
from my manner of sharing in the common life of men. 

Could it be objected that this detachment is an illegitimate 

109 



abstraction? But it is an indisputable fact that my life, understood 
in this sense i.e. as participation in this common world may 
become for me an object of judgment, approval or condemnation. 
My life is something I can evaluate. An essential datum. But what am 
I, this I which evaluates it? Impossible to cling to the fiction of a 
transcendental I. The I that evaluates is the same as the I that is 
judged. It must be added that my life, just in so far as I lead it, is, 
as it were, shot through by an implicit evaluation (whether adhered 
to or disobeyed; for I may be leading a life which something within 
me is continually protesting against with a dull insistence). This is 
the state of things, complex and in some ways contradictory as it is, 
discovered by me when I ask the question 'What am I?' But it is a 
real situation, and just because it is real I can evade it and withdraw 
from it. 

Our world (some day we must scrutinise the sense of that word) 
is so constituted that within it despair is a possibility. In this fact we 
see the crucial significance of death. Death at first sight looks like a 
permanent invitation to despair indeed, one might almost say, to 
betrayal in all its shapes at least in so far as it is seen in the perspec- 
tive of my life and of the assertion that I make in declaring myself 
identical with my life. There is a collaboration (in the sense of 
betrayal) between this obsessive picture of death and the feeling 
that my life offers nothing to hold on to beyond the moment lived, 
and that therefore every bond, every commitment, every vow, rests 
on a lie, since it rests on the arbitrary prolongation into eternity of a 
mere passing moment. All fidelity being thus rejected or uprooted, 
the betrayal itself now becomes changed in character. Now it claims 
that it is itself the true fidelity; and what we call fidelity, it calls 
betrayal betrayal of the instant, betrayal of the real Me experienced 
in the instant. But here we are in the realm of the unthinkable; for 
in setting up the principle of fidelity to the instant, we transcend 
the instant. This, however, is a merely dialectical refutation, which 

no 



in my view is lacking in real effect. And anyhow, an effective 
refutation ought to be impossible here; despair is irrefutable. Here 
there is only room for us to opt on one side or the other; it is past the 
province of any dialectic. 

I note in passing that absolute fidelity can only be given to us in 
the person of certain witnesses, above all the martyrs. And it must 
be given to something in us which itself belongs to the order of 
faith. Whereas experience of betrayal is everywhere; and first of all 
in ourselves. 

November i8th 

The transition from the problem of being to the question 'What 
am I'? What am I, I who ask questions about being? What am I 
like, that I should be led to ask these questions? 

The transition from problem to mystery. There is an ascending 
scale here; a problem conceals a mystery in so far as it is capable of 
awakening ontological overtones (the problem of survival, for 
instance). 

The problem of the relation of soul and body is more than a 
problem: that is the implicit conclusion of Existence and Objectivity. 1 

Something unrepresentable yet concrete something which is 
more than an idea, and exceeds every idea we can form, something 
which is a presence. An object as such is not present. 2 

November i2tb 

I was talking to the abbe A yesterday about Theresa Neu- 
mann. This morning I was thinking with exasperation of the 
rationalist's attitude to such facts. They would refuse to give them 
a hearing. Reflecting next upon my own exasperation, I thought it 

1 Appendix of the Journal Mttapbysique. (Ed. N.R.F.) 

2 A possible way towards a theory of eucharistic presence. (Note 
written October loth, 1934.) 

ill 



was surely to be traced to some residue of doubt in myself. If I were 
absolutely sure, I should only experience a feeling of pure charity 
and pity for doubters. I think this discovery is far-reaching. It seems 
to me that charity is bound up with being sure. This must be 
developed. 1 

November 28tb 

A sentence came to my lips as I looked at a dog lying down 
outside a shop. 'There is something called being alive, and some- 
thing else called active existence. I have chosen the latter/ 

December $tb 

After the strains and stresses of the last few days (the putting of 
Le Mort de Demain on the stage) I reached the point this morning 
where one no longer understands one's own thought. I was tempted 
to say that the word mystery is stuck on like a label saying, 'Please 
do not touch/ In order to begin understanding again, we are always 
bound to refer back to the order of the problematic. Mystery is the 
metaproblematic. 

We should also make use of the principle which I laid down last 
Saturday with regard to the reality of other selves: the possibility of 
denial and negation take on for us a greater consistency and (so to 
say) density, in proportion as we mount further up the hierarchy of 
realities. 2 

December 6tb 

I was thinking just now that our condition I will not exactly 
define this term for the moment implies or requires a kind of 

1 It contains an idea which must seem paradoxical; it comes down in 
fact to admitting that the quality at the root of fanaticism is not certainty 
at all not even an unbalanced certainty but a mistrust of oncVsclf, a 
fear which one does not admit to one's-self. 

2 This is why it is so much easier to deny God than to deny matter. 
(Note written October icth, 1934.) 

112 



systematic sealing-off of mystery, both in ourselves and in our sur- 
roundings. The sealing is done by the almost indefinable idea is it 
even an idea? of the 'perfectly ordinary*. There is a close con- 
nection between the objective and the 'perfectly ordinary*. A grip 
on being is only possible for us when we suddenly break through 
the enclosing shell which we have grown round ourselves. 'Except 
ye become as little children . . .* Our condition can be transcended, 
but only by a heroic and necessarily intermittent effort. The meta- 
physical essence of the object as such is perhaps simply its power of 
sealing-off. We cannot specify it further than that. We cannot, in 
the presence of any object, question ourselves about the mystery 
hidden within it. Such a question would be no more than pseudo- 
problematic. 1 

Deccmkr nth 

I have dwelt this morning on the subject of recollection. 2 This is a 
central datum upon which very little work seems to have been 
done. Not only I am in a position to impose silence upon the 
strident voices which usually fill my consciousness, but also, this 
silence has a positive quality. Within the silence, I can regain 
possession of myself. It is in itself a principle of recovery. I should 
be tempted to say that recollection and mystery are correlatives. 
Thpre is, properly speaking, no such thing as recollection in face 
of a problem. On the contrary, the problem puts me in some ways 
into a state of mental tension. Whereas recollection is rather the 
banishment of tension. Notice, however, that these terms 'tension* 
and 'relaxation* are apt in some directions to mislead us. 

1 In this we see the metaphysical root of all genuine poetry, for the very 
essence of poetry lies in not questioning but asserting. There is a close 
link between the poetic and the prophetic. (Note written October loth, 

I934-) 

2 In the spiritual sense. (Translator's note.) 

H 113 M.B.H. 



If we asked ourselves what could be the metaphysical make-up 
of a being capable of recollection, we should be a long way nearer 
to a concrete ontology. 

December ijtb 

I must make one point clear at the beginning of my statement. 
The question I have in mind is: How to define the kind of meta- 
physical climate which seems to me the most favourable perhaps 
the only favourable for developing assertions about the supra- 
sensible order? 

December i8tb 

After agonising hours of almost complete intellectual blindness, 
I suddenly came to a new and clearer comprehension while crossing 
the Monatgne Sainte-Genevieve. 1 

We must see that: 

(1) The ontological need, in the effort to explain itself, is found 
not to be comparable with the search after a solution. 

(2) The metaproblematic is a participation on which my reality 
as subject is built (WE DO NOT BELONG TO OURSELVES); and 
reflection will show us that such a participation, if it is genuine, 
cannot be a solution. If it were, it would cease to be a participation 
in transcendent reality, and would become, instead, an interpolation 
into transcendent reality, and would be degraded in the process. 

We must therefore proceed to make two distinct inquiries. One 

of these prepares for the other, but does not condition it, and both, 

in a sense, lead towards each other. They are: (a) an investigation 

of the nature of the ontological need, and (V) an investigation of the 

conditions in which a participation assumed to be a participation 

in reality could become thinkable. We then discover that it is just 

this participation which passes beyond the order of the problematic, 

1 A district of Paris. (Translator's note.) 

114 



and beyond what can be stated as a problem. It must next be 
shown that in fact, as soon as there is presence, we have gone beyond 
the realm of problem. But at the same time we shall see that the 
motive power that activates all thought which proceeds by means 
of problems and solutions that this motive power gives a provi- 
sional character to every judgment we make, so that every presence 
may always give rise to problems. But it can only do so in so far as 
it loses its worth as presence. 

December 2otb 

Knowledge is within being, enfolded by it. The ontological 
mystery of knowledge. We can only arrive at it by a reflection at one 
remove, which depends upon an experience of presence. 

December 22nd 

Have seen clearly the connection between the problem of suffering 
(and no doubt of evil generally) and the problem of my body. The 
problem of the metaphysical justification of suffering contains a 
reference (which may be disguised) to my suffering, or to a suffering 
which I make mine by assuming it. If no account is taken of this 
reference, the problem becomes meaningless. Hence the curiously 
hollow note of Leibnitz's remarks on this subject (and even, in a 
way, of Spinoza's, by very reason of his heroism). But the difficulty 
we have noticed so often before arises here once more with its full 
force. The problem, it would seem, is stated with greater sharpness 
as the suffering invades my being more completely. Yet on the 
other hand, the more this is so, the less can I split it off from myself, 
as it were, and take up my position before it. It is embodied in me; 
it is me. 

December 2jrd 

In this aspect, the problem of suffering, more deeply considered, 
tends to take on the same form as it does in the book of Job. But 



his problem, torn out of its theological context, means that the 
more nearly suffering touches me, the more arbitrary is the act by 
which I consider the suffering as outside myself and (as it were) 
accidentally endured: the act, that is, by which I assume a sort of 
underlying soundness in my being (this is particularly easy to see in 
cases of bereavement or illness). And yet I feel that I can still only 
see this through a veil. I hope it will not be long before the veil is 
torn away. 

OUTLINE OF AN ESSAY READ TO THE SOCIETY 
OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES 

at Marseilles, on January 2ist, 1933, on the Position of the Ontological 

Mystery and the Concrete Approaches to it. 
(A) If we consider the present position of philosophical thought, 
as expressed in the depths of a consciousness which is trying to 
fathom its own needs, we are led, I think, to make the following 
observations: 

(1) The traditional terms in which some people are today still 
trying to state the problem of being, commonly arouse a mistrust 
which is hard to overcome. Its source lies not so much in the 
adherence, whether explicit or implicit, to Kantian or simply idealist 
theories, as in the fact that people's minds are soaked in the results 
of Bergsonian criticism. One sees this even in those minds which 
would not stand by Bergsonianiam in its metaphysical aspects. 

(2) On the other hand, the complete withdrawal from the prob- 
lem of being which characterises so many contemporary philoso- 
phical systems is in the last analysis an attitude which cannot be 
maintained. It can either be reduced to a kind of sitting on the 
fence, hardly defensible and generally due to laziness or timidity: or 
else and this is what generally happens it really comes down to 
a more or less explicit denial of Being, which disguises the refusal 
of a hearing to the essential needs of our being. Ours is a being 

116 



whose concrete essence is to be in every way involved, and therefore 
to find itself at grips with a fate which it must not only undergo, 
but must also make its own by somehow re-creating it from within. 
The denial of Being could not really be the empirical demonstration 
of an absence or lack. We can only make the denial because we 
choose to make it, and we can therefore just as well choose not to 
make it. 

() It is also worth noticing that I who ask questions about 
Being do not in the first place know either if I am nor a fortiori what 
I am. I do not even clearly know the meaning of the question 
'what am I?' though I am obsessed by it. So we fee the problem of 
Being here encroaching upon its own data, and being studied actually 
inside the subject who states it. In the process, it is denied (or 
transcended) as problem, and becomes metamorphosed to mystery. 

(C) In fact, it seems very likely that there is this essential differ- 
ence between a problem and a mystery. A problem is something 
which I meet, which I find complete before me, but which I can 
therefore lay siege to and reduce. But a mystery is something in 
which I am myself involved, and it can therefore only be thought 
of as a sphere where the distinction between what is in me and what is before 
me loses its meaning and its initial validity. A genuine problem is sub- 
ject to an appropriate technique by the exercise of which it is 
defined: whereas a mystery, by definition, transcends every con- 
ceivable technique. It is, no doubt, always possible (logically and 
psychologically) to degrade a mystery so as to turn it into a problem. 
But this is a fundamentally vicious proceeding, whose springs 
might perhaps be discovered in a kind of corruption of the intelli- 
gence. The problem of evil, as the philosophers have called it, 
supplies us with a particularly instructive example of this degrada- 
tion. 

(D) Just because it is of the essence of mystery to be recognised 
or capable of recognition, it may also be ignored and actively 

117 



denied. It then becomes reduced to something I have 'heard talked 
about*, but which I refuse as only being/or other people; and that in 
virtue of an illusion which these 'others' are deceived by, but which 
I myself claim to have detected. 

We must carefully avoid all confusion between the mysterious 
and the unknowable. The unknowable is in fact only the limiting 
case of the problematic, which cannot be actualised without contra- 
diction. The recognition of mystery, on the contrary, is an essenti- 
ally positive act of the mind, the supremely positive act in virtue of 
which all positivity may perhaps be strictly defined. In this sphere 
everything seems to go on as if I found myself acting on an intuition 
which I possess without immediately knowing myself to possess it 
an intuition which cannot be, strictly speaking, self-conscious 
and which can grasp itself only through the modes of experience 
in which its image is reflected, and which it lights up by being thus 
reflected in them. The essential metaphysical step would then con- 
sist in a reflection upon this reflection (in a reflection 'squared'). 
By means of this, thought stretches out towards the recovery of an 
intuition which otherwise loses itself in proportion as it is exercised. 

Recollection, the actual possibility of which may be regarded as 
the most revealing ontological index we possess, is the real place in 
whose centre this recovery can be made. 

(JE) The 'problem of being', then, will only be the translation 
into inadequate knguage of a mystery which cannot be given 
except to a creature capable of recollection a creature whose 
central characteristic is perhaps that he is not simply identical with 
his own life. We can find the proof or confirmation of this non- 
identity in the fact that I more or less explicitly evaluate my life. It is 
in my power not only to condemn it by an abstract verdict, but to 
set an effective term to it. If I cannot set an effective term to my life 
considered in its ultimate depths, which may escape from my 
grasp, I at least have power over the finite and material expression 

118 



to which I am at liberty to believe that this life is reduced. The fact 
that suicide is possible is, in this sense, an essential point of reference 
for all genuine metaphysical thought. And not only suicide: despair 
in all its forms, betrayal in all its aspects, in so far as they appear to us 
as active denials of being, and in so far as the soul which despairs 
shuts itself up against the central and mysterious assurance in which 
we believe we have found the principle of all positivity. 

(F) It is not enough to say that we live in a world where betrayal 
is possible at every moment, in every degree, and in every form. It seems 
that the very constitution of our world recommends Us, if it does 
not force us, to betrayal. The spectacle of death as exhibited by the 
world can, from one point of view, be regarded as a perpetual 
provocation to denial and to absolute desertion. It could also be 
added that space and time, regarded as paired modes of absence, 
tend, by throwing us back upon ourselves, to drive us into the 
beggarly instantaneity of pleasure. But it seems that at the same 
time, and correlatively, it is of the essence of despair, of betrayal, 
and even of death itself, that they can be refused and denied. If the 
word transcendence has a meaning, it means just this denial; or 
more exactly, this overpassing. (Uberwindung rather than Aufhebung.) 
For the essence of the world is perhaps betrayal, or, more accurately, 
there is not a single thing in the world about which we can be 
certain that its spell could hold against the attacks of a fearless 
critical reflection. 

(G) If this is so, the concrete approaches to the ontological 
mystery should not be sought in the scale of logical thought, the 
objective reference of which gives rise to a prior question. They 
should rather be sought in the elucidation of certain data which are 
spiritual in their own right, such as fidelity, hope and love, where 
we may see man at grips with the temptations of denial, introver- 
sion, and hard-heartedness. Here the pure metaphysician has no 
power to decide whether the principle of these temptations lies in 

119 



man's very nature, in the intrinsic and invariable characteristics of 
that nature, or whether it lies rather in the corruption of that same 
nature as the result of a catastrophe which gave birth to history and 
was not merely an incident in history. 

Perhaps on the ontological level it is fidelity which matters most. 
It is in fact the recognition not a theoretical or verbal, but an 
actual recognition of an ontological permanency; a permanency 
which endures and by reference to which we endure, a permanency 
which implies or demands a history, unlike the inert or formal 
permanency of a pure validity, a law for example. It is the perpetua- 
tion of a witness which could at any moment be wiped out or 
denied. It is an attestation which is creative as well as perpetual, 
and more creative in proportion as the ontological worth of what it 
attests is more outstanding. 

(H) An ontology with this orientation is plainly open to a revela- 
tion, which, however, it could not of course either demand or pre- 
suppose or absorb, or even absolutely speaking understand, but the 
acceptance of which it can in some degree prepare for. To tell the 
truth, this ontology may only be capable of development in fact on a 
ground previously prepared by revelation. But on reflection we can 
see that there is nothing to surprise us, still less to scandalise us, in 
this. A metaphysic can only grow up within a certain situation 
which stimulates it. And in the situation which is ours, the existence 
of a Christian datum is an essential factor. It surely behoves us to 
renounce, once for all, the naively rationalist idea that you can have 
a system of affirmation valid for thought in general, or for any 
consciousness whatsoever. Such thought as this is the subject of 
scientific knowledge, a subject which is an idea but nothing else. 
Whereas the ontological order can only be recognised personally 
by the whole of a being, involved in a drama which is his own, 
though it overflows him infinitely in all directions a being to 
whom the strange power has been imparted of asserting or denying 

1 20 



himself. He asserts himself in so far as he asserts Being and opens 
himself to it: or he denies himself by denying Being and thereby 
closing himself to It. In this dilemma lies the very essence of his 
freedom. 

EXPLANATIONS 

(1) From this point of view, what becomes of the notion of 
proving the existence of God? We must obviously subject it to a 
careful revision. In my view, all proof refers to a certain datum, 
which is here the belief in God, whether in myself or in another. 
The proof can only consist in a secondary reflection of the type 
which I have defined; a reconstructive reflection grafted upon a 
critical reflection; a reflection which is a recovery, but only in so 
far as it remains the tributary of what I have called a blindfold 
intuition. It is clear that the apprehension of the ontological mystery 
as metaproblematic is the motive force of this recovery through 
reflection. But we must not fail to notice that it is a reflexive motion 
of the mind that is here in question, and not a heuristic process. The 
proof can only confirm for us what has really been given to us in 
another way. 

(2) What becomes of the notion of Divine attribute? 

This, on the level of philosophy, is much more obscure. At 
present I can only see ways of approach to the solution. And any- 
how, there can only be a solution where there is a problem, and the 
phrase 'the problem of God* is certainly contradictory and even 
sacrilegious. The metaproblematic is above all 'the Peace which 
passeth all understanding', but this Peace is a living peace, and, as 
Mauriac wrote in Le Noeud de Viperes, a Peace which is somebody, 
a creative Peace. It seems to me that the infinity and the omnipo- 
tence of God, can also only be established in the reflexive way. It is 
possible for us to understand that we cannot deny these attributes 
without falling back into the sphere of the problematic. This is 

121 



tantamount to saying that the theology which philosophy leads us 
to is an essentially negative theology. 

(3) We must question ourselves about the sense of the copula in 
the light of the idea of the metaproblematic. For me, generally 
speaking, there is being in so far as there is rootedness in the ontolo- 
gical mystery, and I should say from this point of view that the 
abstract alone as such does not exist (all its life is in the pure 
problematic). We must attach the 'being* of the copula to 'being* 
simply. The latter irradiates the 'being* of the copula (for instance, 
the being of Peter irradiates the copula in Peter is good). 

We must look more closely into my remarks on intuition; for it is 
not yet perfectly clear to me. I am really talking about an intuition 
which is, as it were, active and purely active an intuition, in fact, 
of which I could not in any manner have the disposal. But its 
presence is expressed by the ontological unease which is at work in 
reflection. To explain this we should start with an example or 
illustration; perhaps the demand for purity or even for truth. This 
intuition is not in me. There is something to be discovered or 
invented here, if one does not wish to remain in a state of negation. 

What really brings us to admit this intuition is the fact of reflect- 
ing on the following paradox, / do not know myself what I believe; (A 
paradox which has held my attention for a long time; it must be 
scrutinised and defined.) We instinctively assert the contrary. I can 
make a sort of inventory of my objects of belief or a kind of 'valua- 
tion* distinguishing between what / believe and what / do not believe. 
This implies that a difference is given me and can be felt by me 
between what I adhere to and what I do not adhere to. 

Every specification (referring to a content in which I assert that 
I know myself to believe) presupposes at least the possibility of such 
an enumeration, such an inventory. But, on the other hand, it 
seems to me that the Being towards which the belief is directed is 
above every possible inventory. That is to say, it cannot be a thing 

122 



among others, an object among others. (And conversely, 'among 
others' has no rfieaning except for 'things' or 'objects'.) Yet this is 
not absolutely clear, even to me. 

(Of course we need not here take into account the articles of a 
positive Creed. In this case the inventory is not made by me. There 
is a whole which is given as an indivisible whole. Heresy consists 
precisely in making arbitrary deductions from the body of such a 
whole.) 

I shall certainly be asked : 'of what belief do you speak? of what 
faith?' 

This again is asking me to specify. If I refuse to do so, I shall be 
blamed for remaining in a state of such vagueness that all discussion, 
and all elucidation too, becomes impossible. Nevertheless this 
faith, solid, entire, and as it were prior to all possible elucidation, 
must be upheld. It implies adherence to a reality whose character is 
never to be given piecemeal or offered retail. Such adherence would 
be impossible if this reality were not present; perhaps we should say 
if it did not invest me completely. 

Examine as thoroughly as possible the fact that the most consecrated 
people are the most disposable. A person who is consecrated has 
renounced himself. But is it the same for a person who has con- 
secrated himself to a social cause? 

January i$th f 1933 

PHENOMENOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF DEATH 

Death can appear as the extreme expression of our corruptibility 
(it is that in Voyage au Bout de la Nuit) or, on the contrary, as 'pure 
emancipation'. (It can appear as the extreme of non-disposability 
or, on the contrary, as the elimination of non-disposability.) We 
can treat it as betrayal only from a different and more superficial 
point of view. 

A person who has made himself more and more disposable 

123 



cannot but regard death as a release (I am thinking of what Mme. 
F was telling us in the car about Mme. B's dtath). It is im- 
possible to allow the least validity to the opinion that that is just an 
'illusion*. (The absurdity of 'you will see well enough that it isn't 
true at least, you would see if . . .') In what degree does faith in this 
release render it actually possible? A problem to be stated with the 
greatest accuracy (what is in all other cases merely a 'hypothesis' 1 
becoming here an unconquerable and insurmountable conviction). 
I note in passing that the Christian idea of mortification should be 
understood in the light of this 'releasing death*. It is the apprentice- 
ship to a more than human freedom. I notice once more that there 
is a way of accepting one's death how important one's last 
moments are! whereby the soul is consecrated (and perhaps made 
disposable in the sense I have tried to define). Spinoza made a 
radical mistake when he denied that any meditation on death was 
worth while. Plato, on the other hand, may have foreshadowed it 
all. Consider suicide in the light of these remarks. (I am thinking 

of poor little N whose appalling death we heard of yesterday.) 

To dispose of one's-self in that way is the opposite of disposability 
considered as self-consecration. 

January i6tb 

This is a most important question to examine. The being who is 
absolutely disposable for others does not allow himself the right to 
dispose freely of himself. 

Link between suicide and non-disposability. 

January i)th-2otb 

Reflection on the question 'What am I?' and upon its implica- 
tions. When I reflect upon the implications of the question 'What 
am I?' taken as a single issue, I see that it means: 'What is there in 

1 The perhaps of the agnostic is fundamentally unacceptable to the 
dedicated soul. 

124 



me that can answer this question?' Consequently, every answer to 
this question coming from me must be mistrusted. 

But could not someone else supply me with the answer? An 
objection immediately arises: the qualifications which the other 
may have which enable him to answer me, the eventual validity of 
what he says, are observed by me; but what qualifications have I 
for making this observation? I can, therefore, only refer myself 
without contradiction to a judgment which is absolute, but which 
is at the same time more within me than my own judgment. In 
fact, if I treat this judgment as in the least exterior to me, the 
question of what it is worth and how it is to be appreciated must 
inevitably be asked afresh. The question is then eliminated qua 
question and turns into an appeal. But perhaps in proportion as I 
take cognizance of this appeal qua appeal, I am led to recognise that 
the appeal is possible only because deep down in me there is some- 
thing other than me, something further within me than I am myself 
and at once the appeal changes its index. 

Someone will object, 'This appeal may in the first sense be with- 
out a real object; it may, as it were, lose itself in the dark.' But what 
does this objection mean? That I have not perceived any answer to 
this 'question', i.e. that 'someone else has not answered it'. I remain 
here on the level of the observation or non-observation of facts; but 
by doing so I am taking up a position in the circle of the problema- 
tic (that is, of what is placed before me). 

January 2jth 

While we were walking yesterday on the hills above Mentone, I 
thought once more about the mastery of our own mastery, which is 
obviously parallel to reflection in the second degree. It is clear that 
this second mastery is not of the technical order and can only be the 
perquisite of some people. In reality, thought in general is what 
'one* thinks. The 'one* is the technical man, in the same way as h< 

125 



is the subject of cpistcmology, when that science is considering 
knowledge as a technic. This is, I think, the case with Kant. The 
subject of metaphysical reflection, on the contrary, is essentially 
opposed to 'one': this subject is essentially not the man in the street. 
Any epistemology which claims to be founded on thought-in- 
general is leading to the glorification of technics and of the man in 
the street (a democratisation of knowledge which really ruins it). 
Furthermore, it must not be forgotten that technics stand on a lower 
step than the creation which they presuppose a creation which 
itself also transcends the level where the man in the street holds 
sway. The 'one* is also a step down; but by admitting him we 
create him. We live in a world where this man of straw begins to 
look more and more like a real figure. 

February 2nd 

I intend to return to the analysis of all this. We must say that 
mystery is a problem that encroaches upon the intrinsic conditions 
of its own possibility (and not upon its data). Freedom is the basic 
example. 

How can something which cannot be reduced to a problem be 
actually thought? In so far as I treat the act of thinking as a way of 
looking, this question would admit of no solution. Something 
which cannot be reduced to a problem cannot be looked at or 
treated as an object, and that by definition. But this representation 
of thought is in fact inadequate: we must manage to make abstrac- 
tion from it. We must recognise, however, that this is extremely 
difficult. As I see it, the act of thinking cannot be represented and 
must be grasped as such. And what is more, it must apprehend 
every representation of itself as essentially inadequate. The contra- 
diction implied in the fact of thinking of a mystery falls to the 
ground of itself when we cease to cling to an objectified and mis- 
leading picture of thought. 

126 



February 6th 

I return to my remarks oflast January i6th. Why does the being 
who is absolutely disposable for someone else refuse to allow him- 
self the right of disposing freely of himself? Simply for the reason 
that in thus disposing of himself (by suicide), he renders himself 
non-disposable for others; or at least he acts like a man who does 
not give himself the least trouble to remain disposable for others. 
And so the whole thing hangs together. Suicide and martyrdom 
are strictly opposites. All this turns on the formula: the soul most 
essentially dedicated is ipso facto the most disposable. Such a soul 
wills itself to be an instrument; but suicide is the act of denying 
one's-self as an instrument. 

My remarks of January 24th (at Mentone) still seem important 
to me. It is clear that 'one* is a fiction, but everything goes on as if 
that fiction were becoming reality. It is more and more openly 
treated as a reality. (Yet the technician is not a pure technician; his 
technics cannot be exercised except where certain minimal condi- 
tions of psycho-physiological balance are realised, and we should 
anyhow have grounds for asking whether a technic dealing with 
these conditions themselves is possible in the last analysis.) 

Return to the notion of problematisation. It seems to me that 
every effort to problematise is conditioned by the ideal assumption 
of a certain continuity of experience which is to be safeguarded 
against appearances. In this connection, from any problematic point 
of view whatsoever, miracle equals nonsense. This cannot be too 
explicitly recognised. But cannot the very notion of this empirical 
continuum be criticised? We shall have to discover the exact con- 
nection between this way of asking the question and my definition 
of mystery. This will no doubt be best done by making use of a 
concrete problem (for instance, an encounter). 

I should be inclined to say that the continuity implied in all 
problematisation is the continuity of a 'system for me*. Whereas in 

127 



mystery it is quite different; I am carried beyond any 'system for me' . 
I am involved in concrete in an order which, by definition, can never 
become an object or a system for me, but only for a thought which 
over-reaches and comprehends me, and with which I cannot 
identify myself, even ideally. Here the word 'beyond* takes on its 
full and true significance. 

All problematisation is relative to 'my system' and 'my system* is 
an extension of 'my body*. 

The egocentricity will be contested, but the truth is that any 
scientific theory whatsoever remains in the last analysis tributary to 
thepercipio and not at all to the plain cogito. Thepercipio remains the 
real centre of all problematisation whatever, however carefully it 
may be disguised. 

From another side, I was thinking just now that our business 
here is to find a translation into speculative terms of the practical 
theocentricity which adopts as its centre, 'Thy will and not mine*. 
This seems to me essential. But it must be seen, on the other hand, 
that the theocentricity itself presupposes theoretical assertions to 
which it is extremely difficult to give a form. 'Thy will* is not 
absolutely given me in the sense that my will to live and my appetite 
is given me. 'Thy will* is for me something to be recognised, to be 
construed, whereas my appetite simply makes demands, simply 
imposes itself. 

February jtb 

The more we think of the past in concrete, the less meaning there 
is in declaring it to be immutable. The only thing which is really 
independent of the present act and the re-creative interpretation, is a 
certain scheme of events; but tliis scheme is merely an abstraction. 

The scrutiny of the past; the reading of the past. 

The interpretation of the world in terms of technics, in the light 
of technics. The world to be construed, to be deciphered. 

128 



I would say, to sum up my observations, that the belief in an 
immovable past is due to an optical error of the spirit. People will 
say 'the past taken in itself does not move; what changes is our way 
of thinking about it*. But must we not be idealists here and say that 
the past cannot be separated from the consideration of the past? 
They will say again, 'It is an immutable fact that Peter accom- 
plished an action at such a moment of time. Only the interpretation 
of the action can vary, and that is exterior to the reality of Peter's 
action or of Peter himself/ But I do in fact suspect that this last 
assertion is untrue, though I cannot absolutely prove it so. It seems 
to me that Peter's realityinfinitely transcendent over Peter's action 
remains involved in the interpretation which renews and re- 
creates the action. Perhaps that is an absurd idea; we shall have to 
see. But I would say without demur that Peter's reality is, in a way 
that can hardly be specified, one with the power of scrutiny which 
is applied after the event to his actions, to this datum which is 
claimed to be immutable. This is infinitely clear upon the highest 
level, in Christology, but more and more uncertain the further one 
goes down towards the insignificant. But the insignificant is no more 
than a limiting case. The importance of the novelist's an in its 
highest form is that it shows us that the insignificant, strictly speak- 
ing, cannot and does not exist. 

February 8tb 

My history is not transparent to me. It is only my history in so far 
as it is not transparent to me. In this sense, it cannot become part of 
my system and perhaps it even breaks up my system. 

February nth 

All this, I feel, needs to be drawn out. At bottom, 'my history' 
is not a clear notion. On the one hand, I interpret myself to myself 
as the object of a possible biography. On the other hand, starting 

i 129 M.B.H, 



from an intimate experience of myself, I unmask the central illusion 
in every conceivable biography; I apprehend all biography as 
fiction (as I hinted at the end of my note on Schloezer's Gogol). 

February ijtb 

Must think about autonomy. It seems to me that we can only talk 
legitimately about autonomy in the order of administration and the 
administrate. Knowledge the act or work of knowing can this 
be compared with administration? 

February i$th 

The administration of an inheritance or estate. Life itself com- 
pared to an estate, and treated as capable of being administered or 
managed. In all this, there is room for autonomy. But the nearer we 
come to creation, the less we can speak of autonomy, or rather we 
can only do so at a lower level, the level of exploitation; for instance, 
the artist exploiting his inspiration. 

The idea of autonomous disciplines: this, too, can be interpreted 
in terms of administration. There is the notion of a plant to be 
exploited, constituting, as it were, a set of tools, or a capital sum 
specially earmarked for its use. This idea loses every sort of meaning 
as one rises to the notion of philosophical thought. Yes, that is how 
it is. The discipline is being treated as the field or mode of 
exploitation. 

Bring this to bear on the very notion of truth. Shew the postulate 
or hidden method of representation which is taken for granted by 
those who think that the mind must be autonomous in its pursuit 
of the truth. This is still not absolutely clear to me today. It seems to 
me that we always start from a twofold notion, of a field to be 
developed, and also of an equipment which will make this develop- 
ment possible. It is as though we would not let ourselves admit that 
this equipment can be supplemented a\> extra. We say that it would 

no 



be cheating; we add that it would anyhow be impossible really to 
bring it off. 

I am tempted to think that the idea of autonomy is bound up 
with a kind of narrowing or particularisation of the subject. The 
more I enter into an activity with the whole of myself, the less right 
have we to say that I am autonomous. (In this sense, the philo- 
sopher is less autonomous than the pure scientist, and the pure 
scientist himself less so than the technician.) Autonomy is bound 
up with the existence of a sphere of activity which is strictly circum- 
scribed. If this is so, the whole of the Kantian ethic rests upon a 
monstrous contradiction, a sort of speculative aberration. 

My life, considered in the totality of its implications suppose 
that this could be done does not seem to me to be something that 
can be administered (either by myself or by someone other than 
me). And to this extent I grasp it as unfathomable (see my note for 
the 8th of February last). Between the administrator and the ad- 
ministered there must exist a certain proportionality, which is here 
lacking. In the order of my life, administration implies mutilation 
(a mutilation, I grant, which is in some respects unavoidable but 
which in other cases is sacrilegious). 

And so we are led to transcend the opposition autonomy- 
heteronomy. For heteronomy is administration by another, but still 
administration; it is on the same level. In the realms of love or 
inspiration, the distinction loses all meaning. At a certain depth 
within me, and in a zone where practical specialisations melt away, 
the terms autonomy and heteronomy become inapplicable. 

February i6tb 

But am I not, in all this argument, ignoring the great sense of the 
word autonomy, the idea of a rational spontaneity working out its 
purpose in the very making of the law? Here, in fact, what becomes 
of the idea of a reason which is legislating universally for itself? Or t 

131 



to go still deeper, what metaphysical dignity is it proper to give to 
the very act of legislation? That is really the crux of the whole 
problem. It seems to me that legislation is simply the formal aspect 
of administration, and that therefore it does not transcend it. In that 
case, what is beyond administration is by definition also beyond 
legislation. 

Autonomy considered as non-heteronomy. I understand by this 
that it refers, phenomenologically speaking, to heteronomy pre- 
supposed and refused. It is the 'by myself!' of the little child who is 
beginning to walk and rejects the hand outstretched to him. 'I want 
to run my own life* that is the radical formula of autonomy. It 
refers essentially to action and implies, as I noted the other day, 
the notion of a certain province of activity circumscribed in space 
and time. Everything belonging to the order of interests, what- 
ever they are, can be treated with relative ease as a province, a dis- 
trict marked off in this manner. Furthermore, I can administer, or 
treat as something to be administered, not only my estate and 
my fortune, but also everything that can be compared even dis- 
tantly to a fortune, or, more generally, to a possession something 
I have. But where the category of having becomes inapplicable, 
I can no longer in any sense talk about administration, whether 
by another or myself, and therefore I cannot talk about autonomy 
either. 

February 21 st 

As soon as we are in Being we are beyond autonomy. That is 
why recollection, in so far as it is regaining contact with Being, 
takes me into a realm where autonomy is no longer conceivable; 
and this is just as true of inspiration, or of any action which in- 
volves the whole of what I am. (The love of a person is strictly 
comparable to inspiration in this respect.) The more I am, the more 
I assert my being, the less I think myself autonomous. The more I 

132 



manage to conceive of my being, the less subject to its own jurisdic- 
tion does it appear to me to be. 1 

February 26tb 

Suppose that an absolute addition, an entirely unsought gift has 
been made to man -whether to some men or to all in the course 
of history, in what sense is the philosopher bound, in what sense 
has he the right or even the power, to refuse to take this gift into 
account? To invoke autonomy here (or even the principle of imma- 
nence, which really comes to the same thing) is to say: 'This addi- 
tion, within the dialectically regulated course of thought, constitutes 
a foreign body, a scandal: as a philosopher at least I cannot recog- 
nise it/ Is this non-recognition implied in the very notion of 
philosophy? What is really being done here is to refuse to allow an 
intrusion to take place in a system regarded as closed. But in 
concrete what does this mean for me, a philosopher? The system is 
not my thought, it goes beyond that. My thought is merely inserted 
into a certain limitless development, with which, however, it 
regards itself as co-extensive in principle. 2 

1 These propositions have an axial character for a metaphysic which 
inclines to assign to a kind of ontological humility the place which most 
traditional philosophers since Spinoza have given to freedom. This is at 
least true in so far as they imply a claim nude by the subject to identify 
himself rationally with a certain Thought immanent in the Whole. It is 
the very possibility of such an identification which is radically denied in 
such a metaphysic as the one I am trying to define here. (Note written 
September nth, 1934.) 

2 The system goes beyond my thought, I said, and this is not untrue: but 
more essentially, my thought goes beyond the system. Here it is probably 
the notion 'in so far as' which ought to be attacked. I should be much 
inclined to think that the philosopher in so far as he is a philosopher, i.e. 
in proportion as he carries out at the heart of his own reality a discrimina- 
tion which mutilates it, is really denying himself as a philosopher; that 
the part played by the minds of the last century that were philosophically 
most alive, such as Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, was just this: that they 

133 



ON HAVING 

A certain subject-unit, or a qui playing the part of a subject-unit, 
becomes a centre of inherence or apprehension for a certain quid 
which he relates to himself or which we treat as if he related it to 
himself. There is a relation here which is transitive only on the 
grammatical level (what is more, the verb 'to have* is almost never 
used in the passive, which is most significant). This relation, which 
essentially affects the subject-unit, tends to pass into it, to be trans- 
muted into a state of the subject-unit, without its being possible for 
this transmutation or reabsorption to be completely carried out. 

In order to have effectively, it is necessary to be in some degree, 
that is to say, in this case, to be immediately for one's-self, to feel 
one's-self, as it were, affected or modified. A mutual interdepen- 
dence of having and being. 

I note that there is a strict parallel between having in one's port- 
folios drawings by X which one might shew to a visitor, and 
having ideas on this or that subject which one will put forward on 
occasion. What one has is really by definition something one can 
shew. It is interesting to note how difficult it is to make a substantive 
of TO ov; TO ov becomes changed to *xl JL * vov as soon as ** * s treated 
as something that can be shewn. But there is a sense in which 'to 
have consciousness of 'means 'to shew to one's-self'. Consciousness 
as such is not a possession or a manner of having, but it may be 
enjoyment of something which it treats as a possession. Every action 
goes beyond possession, but may, after the event, be treated as a 
possession itself; and this in virtue of a sort of grading down. I note 
that the secret, as opposed to the mystery, is essentially a possession 
in that it can be shewn. 

We must not overlook the fact that all spiritual possession has its 

brought to light the sort of dialectic in virtue of which the philosopher is 
led to deny himself as a 'Fachmcnsch', as a specialist. (Note written 
September, 1934.) 

134 



springs in something that cannot be shewn (my ideas are rooted in 
what I am). But what characterises this non-she wable as such, is 
the fact that it does not belong to me, it is essentially uribelonging. 
There is therefore a sense in which I do not belong to myself, and 
this is exactly the sense in which I am absolutely not autonomous. 

February 2jth 

We shew what we have; we reveal what we are (though of 
course only in part). 

Creadon considered as the liberation of what cannot be shewn. 

But where philosophical creation does not exist, philosophy does 
not exist either. It cannot, without denying or betraying itself, 
crystallise into results capable of being simply assimilated and 
thereby possessed. 

March ist 

Could we not make 'having* our starting-point for a definition 
of desire? To desire is to have and not to have: the psychical or non- 
objective element of having already exists in its entirety in desire; 
but it is just by its separation from the objective element that desire 
becomes a gnawing pain. 

March qth 

My deepest and most unshakable conviction and if it is hereti- 
cal, so much that the worse for orthodoxy is, that whatever all 
the thinkers and doctors have said, it is not God's will at all to be 
loved by us against the Creation, but rather glorified through the 
Creation and with the Creation as our starting-point. That is why 
I find so many devotional books intolerable. The God who is set up 
against the Creation and who is somehow jealous of his own works 
is, to my mind, nothing but an idol. It is a relief for me to have 
written this. And I declare until further orders that I shall be in- 

135 



sincere every time I seem to be making an assertion contrary to what 
I have just written. I could not get over my discomfort yesterday with 
X. I was telling him how I disliked denominationalism. He does 
not understand, and says it is pride. But the opposite is the truth. 1 

March $tb 

What I wrote yesterday needs to be qualified. It is true of the stage 
I am in at present, but I know that this stage is still rudimentary. 

I heard once more the Missa Solemnis, conducted by Wein- 
gartner, and was as deeply moved as when I heard it in 1918. 
There is no work that I feel is more in tune with my thoughts. It is a 
luminous commentary upon them. 

March 8tb 

Through a phrase from Brahms (in one of the Intermezzi, op. 
1 1 8, I think) which has been in my head the whole afternoon, I 
have suddenly come to see that there is a universality which is not 
of the conceptual order; that is the key to the idea of music. But 
how hard it is to understand! The idea can only be the fruit of a 
kind of spiritual gestation. A close analogy with the living creature. 2 

1 This, in any case, remains absolutely true for me: that every attempt 
at Divine psychology, every claim to imagine God's attitude towards me, 
inspires me with unconquerable mistrust. It is really quite impossible for 
me to allow that we can somehow ideally place ourselves in God I 
mean put ourselves in his place so as to look at ourselves from thence. 
I am far from ignoring the serious difficulties, of a metaphysical and 
theological order, which certainly derive from such an impossibility, but 
I must confess that the use made by the greater number of theologians of 
the idea of analogy, for getting over this, seems to me to lie open to the 
most serious objections. My own position on this point seems to me, I 
must admit, exposed, delicate, and profoundly unsatisfying. (Note 
written on September I3th, 1934.) 

2 This, too, must be examined and worked out. Bergson is certainly 
right; we are here in an order where duration is somehow incorporated 
with what it is working upon and bringing to its ripeness. But, on what 

136 



March loth 

To return to suicide. At bottom, experience seems to show us 
that men can be disposed of, got rid of. And so I treat myself also 
as able to be disposed of. But here we should try exactly to define 
the limits within which this external experience of the mortality of 
others can be realised. It is, in fact, more complete when the persons 
in question have never counted (existed) for me. But 'being dis- 
posed of loses its meaning more and more in the case of persons 
who, in so far as they have ever really counted in my life, must 
continue to do so still. The 'notion'(?) expressed by the phrase 
'belonging to the past* is not always used in the same sense; it can 
be weakened indefinitely. It only takes on the full harshness of its 
sense where we are speaking of an instrument thrown aside, put out 
of use, cast away. I shall of course be told that a radical distinc- 
tion must be made between the other man as object (for he really is 
got rid of), and a whole set of subjective superstructures which my 
mind builds upon him; they survive the object in so far as my mind 
itself survives him. But as the Neo-Hegelians saw with admirable 
lucidity, this is really a most precarious distinction and should be 
treated with the greatest caution. It can only be applied to the 
limiting case. It loses its meaning in proportion as the person in 
question is really mingled with my life. This can only be denied by 
claiming that the word mingled is inapplicable here and that absolute 
monadism is the truth. If it is not so, and to my mind it manifestly 
is not so, we must recognise that this is not a possible starting-point 
where real intimacy exists. Intimacy; that is really the fundamental 
notion. 

But in that case, it is clear that I cannot consider myself able tc 
be disposed of unless I treat myself as a perfect stranger unless, 

one might call the structural aspect of this order of reality, Bergson haj 
perhaps not thrown enough light in spite of everything. (Note writter 
September 13th, 1934.) 

137 



indeed, I put aside all possibility of haunting, I should come to the 
conclusion that the more actual and profound my intimacy with 
myself, the more right I am in believing that the picture I formed 
of myself as an object which it is in my power to put right out of 
use is one to be treated with caution, and even absurd in itself. 
(It goes without saying that when I speak of haunting, I evoke the 
results which may be brought upon me by a murder of which I am 
guilty. I do not really get rid of my victim; he remains present with 
me in the very heart of the obsession with which I saddled myself 
when I thought to be done with him.) Here again someone will 
say. 'But the whole point is whether the victim is conscious of this 
haunting which he brings about in the man who thinks he has 
blotted him out of his universe/ But here we must return to a close 
examination of the actual problem of consciousness, and first we 
must mint afresh the outworn terminology which we generally em- 
ploy to state it. It is clear that if I stick to a sort of psycho-physical 
parallelism, I shall be tempted to declare that where the body as 
such is destroyed, the consciousness itself is no doubt annihilated. 
It remains to be seen what view we ought to take of this parallel- 
ism. 

To me the arrangement of the world is of such a kind that it 
seems expressly to invite us to believe in this parallelism and so in 
the reality of death. But at the same time a more secret voice, more 
subtle clues, allow us to feel that this may be nothing but a facade, 
to be treated and appreciated as a fa$ade. Then freedom springs 
up in arms against such counterfeits; and as she rouses herself, 
she discerns in the borders of experience all manner of alliances, 
all manner of promises allusions of which one illumines and 
reinforces another of a deliverance, a dayspring still beyond our 
power to imagine. 

With regard to death and mortification; we must understand 
that, for Christians, death compared with life represents not less but 

138 



more, or at least the way to something more; it is an exaltation, and 
not, as fatal error would have us believe, a mutilation or denial. If 
that were so, Nietzsche would be perfectly right; but he is wrong, 
because he clung to an entirely naturalistic view of life, and from 
that point of view the problem no longer has any meaning. Life so 
understood carries with it no beyond, no soaring power; it can no 
longer be transcended. 

Undated 

ON THE PROBLEM OF BEING 

The problem of being tends first of all to be stated as the question : 
'What is the ultimate material of the world?' An enquiry which 
by its very nature proves disappointing. Reflection will shew us, 
first, that the very notion of material is obscure, ambiguous, and 
perhaps inapplicable to the world in its entirety; next, and above 
all, that this material, even supposing we could identify it, might 
well not be the essential thing. So we see that there is distance, an 
open gap, between the intellectual hunger (obscure even to itself] 
which gave birth to the problem, and the terms in which this prob- 
lem is stated. Even if the problem were or could be resolved, the 
hunger would perhaps not be satisfied. At this point the hungei 
would tend to be more directly conscious of itself. In that case there 
would be room for transition to the notion of an intelligible 
organisation or structure. 

This is one of the possible ways. 

But there are others. One is reflection on the idea of appearance, 
and on the implications of the bare fact that there are appearances. 
Another way is to reflect on the fact of assertion. 

There are some appearances that can be manifestly shewn up as 
appearances. Hallucination in all its forms, for one. But in this 
class, one never gets further than correction. Still, there must be a 
great temptation to run all the lines on here and treat the whole of 

139 



experience as <f>aw6iJLtvov. But a very difficult criteriological prob- 
lem will face us then, the same that faces us when, for instance, we 
are distinguishing primary and secondary qualities. Reflection will 
show us in the end that primary qualities are not necessarily en- 
dowed with an ontological priority over secondary qualities. Here 
again an intellectual hunger is at work, a hunger which feels a 
kind of deep-seated trouble in becoming perspicuous to itself. 

The problem of affirmation. All ontology centres on the act of 
affirmation which is considered not, as a matter of fact, in itself, not 
primarily as an act, but in its specific intentionality. And it is in 
this region that we shall find a sort of dangerous neighbourhood 
appearing between ontology and logic in its strict sense. 

March i2tb 

At no time and in no circumstances can affirmation ever appear 
as originator of the reality of what it affirms. The formula is here: 
'I affirm it because it is.' And this formula is already the translation 
of a reflection that came before it, but at this stage the expression 
'this is' seems to be outside the affirmation and prior to it; the 
affirmation refers back to something given. But a second reflection 
is about to arise here. Affirmation in the act of reflecting itself 
is led to encroach on the private and almost holy ground of 
'this is 9 . At this point I say to myself: but 'this is 9 itself 
presupposes an affirmation. Hence we have a regress which 
seems to be infinite, unless I bring myself to lay down the 
affirmation itself as origin. But we will not press this point. 
Let us admit that Being has first laid a sort of siege to the 
self; by self I mean the subject who affirms. This subject none 
the less intervenes between the being and the affirmation, in 
the role of a mediator. And then the problem arises which I 
observed in my notes of January the I9th, for I am inevitably led to 
ask what is the ontological standing of this self in relation to the 

140 



being which besieges him. Is he whelmed in it, or does he on the 
contrary have some sort of command over it? If he commands it, 
what gives him this mastery and what exactly does it mean? 



March 

Are we to say that deeper reflection will lead us to recognise that 
affirmation presupposes a power of positing? a power which some- 
how foreruns it and hands over to it the substance of what the 
affirmation asserts? It is very likely that this is the truth, but how 
can I approach this truth? 

It should be noticed, in any case, that the power of positing, by 
its very essence, goes beyond the problematic (cf. note of last 
February 6th). 

The agony of the present days passes all bounds. The Disarma- 
ment Conference is at the point of death. There was the incident at 
Kehl, and terror reigns there. At times I live with the feeling 
that death is upon us all, and upon all that we love. As I was on 
my way to see V - this afternoon, I had a sort of light on this, in 
the Rue La Condamine just this: 'Think that dream is turning 
into nightmare, and when nightmare has reached its most agoni- 
sing point, you will awake. That will be the experience which 
today you call death.* This upheld me. It is a way of being able to 
bear the haunting idea that Paris will be destroyed. 

March i6th 

'Mysteries are not truths that lie beyond us; they are truths that 
comprehend us/ (R. P. Jouve.) 

March jist 

About N's suicide. Is it in my power to reduce myself to an 
absolute impotence? Can I use my will in such a way as to put 
myself in a state where I can no longer will anything and no longer 

141 



do anything? Does reality lend itself to this absolute desertion (or at 
least would-be absolute desertion)? The least we can assert is that 
reality at any rate seems to be arranged in such a way as to keep up 
in my mind belief in the possibility of such a step, a belief 
in its ultimate effectiveness. The whole band of appearances 
gathered around me encourages me to believe that I can really get 
rid of myself. 

That is how we should express a phenomenology of suicide 
which consisted in seeing how suicide must necessarily look to my 
eyes; a complete enfranchisement, but one in which the liberator, 
in freeing himself from himself, thereby eliminates himself. 

But there is room for another mode of reflection, which compared 
with this is hyper-phenomenological; is this conspiracy of appear- 
ances telling the truth? They seem to range themselves together so 
as to make me think that my freedom is here fundamental. But is 
this absolute act perpetrated by myself upon myself something that 
can really happen? If it were, I should, it seems, be right in claiming 
a sort of ameitas (self-causality) for myself, since I should only 
continue to be by a continuous permission accorded by myself to 
myself. The whole question is, what sort of reality is mine, in a 
world whose constitution is such that it permits what I have called 
an absolute desertion. To my mind, it is clear in any case that such 
a world excludes even the possibility of participation in the being 
upon which my reality as subject rests. I am here no more than 
something that happened to be. But to this happening to which I 
reduce myself, I still attribute the most fundamental power over 
itself. Is there not here an internal contradiction? In other words, 
I am my life but can I still think my life? 

April 11 tb 

Have realised this once again; for each of us, every moment of 
our lives, the worst is possible, or what we think is the worst. There 

142 



is no objective guarantee. This must be reconciled with the idea of 
God an all-powerful God. But does not the fact that the worst is 
possible prove the infinite weakness of God? Between this infinite 
weakness and this infinite power, it seems that a mysterious junction 
takes place, a union of seeming opposites beyond the idea of 
causality. 

July 2yd 

Afterthoughts on a discussion with R. C on the con- 
nection between suffering and sin. 

My claim is that this connection is, properly speaking, inexperi- 
enceable, that is to say, it cannot be transferred to the level of 
particular experience. In the presence of someone who suffers, I am 
absolutely unable to say, 'Your suffering is the punishment for an 
identifiable sin, of which you may not be personally guilty any- 
how.' (C brought in heredity, but this is beside the mark from 

a religious point of view.) We are here in the realm of the un- 
fathomable, and this is something we must manage to make philo- 
sophically clear. A strange thing; suffering is, in fact, only capable 
of taking on metaphysical and spiritual meaning in so far as it 
implies an unfathomable mystery. But on the other hand and this 
is the paradox all suffering is by its very nature 'this suffering', 
whence the almost irresistible temptation to find for it an explana- 
tion or justification which is also determined and particular. But 
this is just what we cannot do. The problem from the religious 
point of view consists in transforming the unfathomable into a 
positive quantity. There is a whole dialectic here which I see only 
in part. To give a particular explanation in terms of punishment is 
to assume that God is 'someone', to place him on the same level as 
the particular person who suffers; and by this very assumption to 
incite the person to discussion and revolt. ('Why me and not so- 
and-so? Why this fault and not that one?' etc.) But it is clear that 



this level of comparison and discussion is just what we must 
transcend. This is surely the same as to say that 'this suffering* 
must be apprehended as the actual participation in an universal 
mystery, which can be grasped as brotherhood and understood as a 
metaphysical bond. 

We should never forget, on the other hand, that the man who 
from outside I am thinking of R. C. draws my attention to the 
link between my suffering and my sin, needs to be inwardly quali- 
fied to carry out the act. He can only be this if he is himself entirely 
humble and offers himself as a sharer, as it were, in my sin. Perhaps 
he must even share in my suffering. In fact, he must become 'another 
I*. In so far as he is a pure and simple other, he cannot play this 
part; he is disqualified. We might find a way from here to a 
philosophical statement about the being of Christ. 1 

July 26tb 

Having and spatiality. Having relates to taking, but it seems that 
there no hold is offered except by things that are in space or can 
be compared with something spatial. These two propositions must 
be closely examined. 

July joth 

I wanted to make a note at Rothau yesterday that the seat of 
suffering certainly seems to be the point at which Having flows into 
Being. Perhaps we can only be hurt through our possessions. But 
is this really so? 

Just now, during a wonderful walk above Zermatt, I was think- 

1 To my mind, these remarks are extremely important in the considera- 
tion of the metaphysical relationship implied in priesthood, and I do not 
mean priesthood regarded in a specially denominational way. By these 
remarks one can, I think, sec the abyss that lies between the attitude of the 
priest and that of the moralist. As soon as the priest begins to turn himself 
into a moralist, he denies himself as a priest. 

144 



ing again very minutely about the essential mutability of the past. 
The notion that events are deposits made in the course of history is 
at bottom a false one. If we look carefully, we shall see that there is 
no historical deposit. The past remains relative to our reading it in 
a certain way. I felt an idea forming in my mind that there is a 
reciprocal tension between the past and the mode of attention that 
is concentrated upon it. If this is so, the expressions 'accomplished 
once and for all' and 'plain and simply happening* would mask a 
positive paralogism. I cannot help thinking that this looks like the 
beginning of a road to which I have not yet really committed myself. 
Perhaps this will provide us with the means of throwing new lights 
upon death. But I do not see clearly as yet; I only have a kind of 
presentiment. We must look at the positive implications of a 
critique of the idea of historical deposit. 

August ijth 

Knowing as a mode of having. The possession of a secret. Keep- 
ing it, disposing of it and here we get back to what I wrote on 
the 'shewable*. The absolute opposition of secret and mystery 
mystery being that which by its very essence I cannot dispose of. 
Knowledge as a mode of having is essentially communicable. 

August i4tb 

The twofold permanence implied in having. (I am still taking 
the fact of having a secret as my typical case.) A secret is itself 
something that resists duration, something upon which duration 
cannot bite, or which is treated as such. But it must be the same 
for the subject, for the qui, otherwise the secret would destroy itself. 
The secret is obviously comparable with the object kept, with the 
content preserved in that which contains it. I think that this 
comparison is always possible as soon as we find ourselves in the 
realm of Having. But and this is worth noticing the analysis of 

K 145 M.B.H. 



the spatial act of keeping is reflected on the spiritual level; I noticed 
this a long time ago. 

We should ask ourselves to what extent we have a feeling, under 
what conditions a feeling can be treated as a possession. Only from 
the social point of view, I think, and in so far as I am in dialogue 
with myself. 

Consider presence as something of which I cannot dispose in 
any way; which I cannot possess. There is a constant temptation 
cither to turn it into an object, or to treat it as an aspect of myself. 
It is as though we were not equipped for thinking about it. There 
are numberless ways of applying this principle. 

Mental 'having 9 . Some people are so made that they can put 
their hand on a required piece of the contents of their mind as if it 
were an object or paper that was efficiently classified. They have 
constituted themselves on the pattern of the classifications which 
they have made of their objects of study. But it may also be said 
conversely that these classifications are only the tangible symbols of 
the order they have inaugurated in themselves. In any case, the 
correspondence between the outward and the mental order tends 
to be as stria as possible. The body comes in here as a principle of 
disturbance, whose possibilities we cannot fathom. The order 
which I have set up within me depends on something over which, 
in the last analysis, I have no power. 

When I am pkced in 'normal' conditions, my mental possessions 
conform to their nature of being possessions; but the moment the con- 
ditions change, this ceases to be the case. To tell the truth, it seems 
that the conditions themselves somehow depend on me and so tend 
also to look like possessions. But this is to a great extent an illusion. 

August i$tb 

I am again preoccupied by the question what it means to possess 
qualities. The word 'also* seems to me only to have meaning in the 

146 



order of Having. Perhaps the recourse to the category of Having for 
thinking of qualities is an expedient, a makeshift necessary if we 
arc to conceive (or persuade ourselves that we conceive) the juxta- 
position of qualities. I am tired this evening but it seems to me 
that there is here a track worth following. 

August i6tb 

What I am trying to say is this. From the moment when the 
category of 'also', of 'in addition* is introduced, the category of 
Having creeps imperceptibly in as well. This would be valid even 
for a single quality, in so far as we are unable to help imagining it 
in our own minds as added to nothing (within an ideal something 
which contains it). I feel that important metaphysical conclusions 
may be drawn from this, notably with regard to the impossibility 
of thinking of God according to the mode of Having, as possessing. 
In this sense any doctrine of the Attributes would tend inevitably 
to lead us astray. The I am that I am of Scripture would be truly 
the most adequate formula from an ontological point of view. 

Here we ought to ask what is the relation between Having and 
passivity. I think that we are passive, and offer a hold, in exact 
proportion as we share in the order of Having. But this is no doubt 
only one aspect of a deeper reality. 

Could not Having be thought of as somehow a way of being 
what one is not? 

It is clear that all these reflections, which seem to be so abstract, 
are founded for me on a curiously immediate experience of ad- 
herence to one's possessions (which are exterior without being 
really so). We must keep returning to the type-case, which is cor- 
poreity, the fact of having a body, typical having, absolute having. 
And, beyond corporeity, we must grasp my relation to my life. The 
ontological meaning of sacrifice of life, of martyrdom. I have 
already noted this, but we must continually return to it. At the 

H7 



present moment, I also glimpse the need to emphasise at once the 
apparent identity and the reafbpposition of martyrdom and suicide: 
the one an affirmation of self, 1 the other a ruling out of self. 

The ontological foundation of Christian asceticism. But this 
detachment (poverty, chastity, etc.) must not be mere amputation; 
everything which is shaken off must be simultaneously found 
again at a higher level. I think all the Gospel texts should be read 
again in the light of these reflections. 

September 2?tb 

I have just re-read these last notes. Must analyse the idea of 
belonging. My body belongs and does not belong to me; that is the 
root of the difference between suicide and martyrdom. Must lay 
bare the metaphysical foundations of a study which aims at dis- 
covering the limits within which I have the right to dispose of my 
body. It would be absurd to condemn self-sacrifice on the ground 
that my body or my life do not belong to me. I must ask myself 
in what sense, and within what limits, I am the master of my 
life. 

The idea of belonging seems to presuppose the idea of organism, 
at least in so far as organism is implied in the fact that there is a 
'within* in it. But this idea of the 'within' is not clear. If we look 
into it, we find that in fact it is not purely spatial. The best example 
here is that of a house, or of anything that can be compared to a 
house; for instance, a cave. 

I thought of this in the Luxemburg, from which I return with 
this formula: 'Having is the function of an order which carries 

1 This formula is clearly inadequate. What is affirmed in martyrdom is 
not the self, but the Being to which the self becomes a witness in the very 
act of self-renunciation. But one can conversely say that in suicide, the 
self affirms itself by its claim to withdraw from reality. (Note written 
September 27th t 1934.) 

148 



with it references to another qua another/ 1 It must in fact be seen 
that the hidden thing, the secret, is ipso facto something that can b$ 
shewn. Tomorrow I should like to try to examine the counterpart 
of this from the point of view of being. It is manifest to me that 
being really implies nothing of the kind. Perhaps even, in the order 
of being, the Other tends to melt away and be denied. 

September 28th 

It should be asked whether the distinction between within and 
without is not denied by being as such. It is connected with the 
problem of appearance. We must see whether, when we bring in 
the idea of appearance, we are not unconsciously shifting our ground 
to the level of having. When we ask ourselves what is the link 
between being and the appearances it presents, we are really asking 
how they can be integrated into it. And the moment the notion of 
integration comes up, we are back on the level of having. Being, it 
seems, can never be a sum. 

October jth 

I return to the category of having in so far as it is implied in the 
fact, for a subject, of having (i.e. of carrying with it) predicates. It is 
not essential to make the distinction between keeping for one's-self 
and giving out. Having includes the possibility of this alternation 
and rhythm. Examine the relation between this and the act of 
consciousness. Does not consciousness also imply this double possi- 
bility? There is probably no fundamental difference between being 
conscious of something and manifesting it to others (i.e. making 
them conscious of it). The other is already there when I am con- 
scious for myself, and expression is, I suppose, only possible be- 

1 The connecting link is the fact that the distinction between within 
and without implies effects of perspective, which are only possible where 
the distinction is drawn between the same and the other. 

149 



cause this is so. We must pass from there to the infra-conscious and 
super-conscious. Can we distinguish them? Perhaps this should be 
correlated with what I wrote on the implications of the question 
what am /? (cf. my note of March I2th). 

Could we not say that there is no problem except the problem of 
Having and what we treat as Having? This would link up with 
my theory of the ontological mystery. In the sphere of the problema- 
tic, the difference between within and without is important; but it 
melts away as soon as we enter the realm of mystery. 

October n tb 

Examine the relations between having and being able. To say 'I 
have the power to . . .' means * the power to is numbered among my 
attributes and endowments'. But that is not all. 'To have 9 is 'to 
have power to', since it is clearly in a sense 'to have the disposal of. 
Here we touch on one of the most obscure and fundamental aspects 
of having. 

October ijtb 

I must relate my notes of the last few days to what I said earlier 
about functional behaviour. A function is, by its very essence, 
something that one has; but in proportion as my function swallows 
me up, it becomes me, and substitutes itself for what I am. Function 
must be distinguished from act, since act clearly escapes from the 
category of having. As soon as there is creation, in whatever degree, 
we arc in the realm of being; that is what we must manage to make 
fully intelligible. One difficulty arises from the fact that creation, in 
the finite sense of the word, is no doubt only possible in the midst 
of a kind of having. The more creation can shake this off, the 
nearer it is to absolute creation. 



150 



SUMMARY 

(1) It is instructive to see how philosophers, in the course of 
history, have for the most part instinctively turned away from 
Having. This is no doubt because the notion contains much 
that is ambiguous, obscure, and almost impossible of elucida- 
tion. 

(2) The moment that a philosopher's attention has turned to 
Having, this attitude can only appear to him to be unjustifiable. A 
phenomenological analysis of Having might well be a useful 
introduction to a renewed analysis of Being. By 'phenomenological 
analysis' I mean the analysis of an implicit content of thought, as 
opposed to a psychological analysis of 'states'. 

(3) It seems: 

(a) that we can only speak of Having where a certain quid is 
related to a certain qui, treated as a centre of inherence and apprehen- 
sion, which is in some degree transcendent; 

(i) that, more strictly, we cannot express ourselves in terms of 
Having except when we are moving on a level where, in whatever 
manner or in however analogical a sense, the opposition of without 
and within retains its meaning; 

(c) that this order is manifested to our thought as essentially 
involving the reference to another qua other. 

(4) The order of having is the order of predication or the 
characterisable. But the metaphysical problem which faces us here 
is to what extent a genuine reality, a reality as such, lends itself to 
characterisation; and also whether being is not essentially un- 
characterisable, though of course it will be understood that the 
uncharacterisable is not the same as the indeterminate. 

(5) The uncharacterisable is also that which cannot be possessed. 
This brings us back to presence. We return to the difference be- 
tween the Thou and the He. It is clear that the Thou, treated as He, 
comes under the jurisdiction of a characterising judgment. But it is 



no less clear that the Thou treated as Thou stands on a different 
level. Examine praise from this point of view. 

The opposition of desire to love is a very important illustration 
of the opposition of Having to Being. Desire is, in fact, having and 
not having. Desire may be regarded as autocentric and hetero- 
ccntric at once (the polarity of the same and the other). But love 
transcends the opposition of the same to the other by planting us in 
Being. 

Another essential application: the difference between autonomy 
and freedom (cf. my note of February i6th). 

October 2yd 

I notice for the first time today that there is, in content, the idea of 
potential action (it can pour out, spread abroad, etc.). There is in 
content what there is in possession, a potency. Content is not purely 
spatial. 

October 2jtb 

Must examine, more closely than I have done as yet, the nature 
of the relative dependency of being and having: our possessions 
swallow us up. The metaphysical roots of the need to preserve. 
Perhaps this links up with what I have written elsewhere about 
alienation. The self becomes incorporated in the thing possessed; 
not only that; but perhaps the self is only there if possession is there 
too. But the self disappears in the full exercise of an act, of any 
creation whatever. It only reappears, it seems, when there is a check 
in creation. 

October 2$th 

I must develop what I said about the uncharacterisable. We 
cannot think of a character without attaching it to a subject by the 
link expressed by the verb to belong. But this supposes a sort of 

152 



pattern whose nature we must try to make clear. We are here in an 
order which essentially carries with it the use of the expression 
'also'; this character is chosen among others. We are not, however, 
faced with a collection, as phenomenalism would have us believe, 
there is always the transcendence of the qui. But is not this transcen- 
dence a function of the attitude which I take up in face of the quit 
Is it not a projection? All this is still very misty in my mind; it is an 
idea that needs bringing into focus. 

To think of somebody else is in a manner to affirm myself in 
face of this somebody else. To put it more accurately, the other is 
on the far side of a chasm, and there is no isthmus between us. But 
this chasm or separation is something that I only realise if I stop 
and stand outside myself picture myself, if you like that better. 

October jotb 

Here is my view. The world of the Same and the Other is the 
world of the identifiable. In so far as I remain its prisoner, I sur- 
round myself with a zone of separation. Only on condition that I 
take my stand in this zone can I think of myself according to the 
category of Having. To identify is in fact to recognise that some- 
thing, or someone, has, or has not, such-and-such a character, and, 
conversely, such-and-such a character is relative to a possible 
identification. 

All this can only have meaning or interest if we manage to con- 
ceive of something beyond this world of the Same and the Other; 
a beyond which reaches out to the ontological as such. This is 
where the difficulties begin. 

One thing we can see immediately; that the question 'What am 
I?' has no equivalent on the level of Having. To this question I 
cannot, by definition, give an answer for myself (cf. my notes of last 
March). 



153 



n 

OUTLINES OF A PHENOMENOLOGY 
OF HAVING 1 

The first point I want to make this evening is that the ideas 
which I am about to put before you are in my opinion 
nuclear ideas. They contain the germ of a whole philo- 
sophy. I will confine myself to the mere adumbration of a great part 
of it; for if it is sound, others will probably be in a position to 
elaborate its various branches in forms which I cannot imagine in 
detail. It is also possible that some of these tracks, whose general 
direction I hope to indicate, may turn out to lead nowhere. 

I think I should tell you, first of all, how it was that I came to ask 
myself questions about Having. The general consideration was 
grafted, as it were, on to inquiries which were more particular and 
concrete, and I think it is essential to begin by referring to them. 
I apologise for having to quote from myself, but it will be the 
simplest way of sharing with you the interests which occasioned 
these researches, otherwise they must seem to you hopelessly ab- 
stract. (The written summary you have received will have given 
you their general sense.) 

In the Journal Metapbysique I had already begun to state the 
following problem, which seems at first to be of a purely psycholo- 
gical order. H<> w I asked, is it possible to identify a feeling which 
we have for the first time? Experience shows that such an identifica- 
tion is often extremely difficult. (Love may appear in such dis- 
concerting shapes as to prevent those who feel it from suspecting its 

1 Paper Delivered to the Lyons Philosophical Society in November, 
1933- 

154 



real nature.) I observed that an identification of this sort can be 
realised in proportion as the feeling can be compared with some- 
thing I have, in the sense that I have a cold or the measles. In that 
case, it can be limited, defined and intellectualised. So far as this 
can be done, I can form some idea of it and compare it with the 
previous notion I may have had about this feeling in general. (I am, 
of course, just giving you a skeleton at present, but never mind.) 
On the other hand, I went on to say, in proportion as my feeling 
cannot be isolated, and so distinguished, I am less sure of being 
able to recognise it. But is there not really a sort of emotional woof 
running across the warp of the feeling I feat/e? and is it not con- 
substantial with what I am, and that to such a degree that I cannot 
really set it before myself and so form a conception of it? This is 
how I got my first glimpse of something which, though it was not 
a clear-cut distinction, was at least a sort of scale of subtle differ- 
ences, an imperceptible shading-offfrom a feeling I have to a feeling 
I am. Hence this note written on March i6th, 193 3 : 

'Everything really comes down to the distinction between what 
we have and what we are. But it is extraordinarily hard to express 
this in conceptual terms, though it must be possible to do so. What 
we have obviously presents an appearance of externality to ourselves. 
But it is not an absolute externality. In principle, what we have arc 
things (or what can be compared to things, precisely in so far as 
this comparison is possible). I can only have, in the strict sense of the 
word, something whose existence is, up to a certain point, in- 
dependent of me. In other words, what I have is added to me; and 
the fact that it is possessed by me is added to the other properties, 
qualities, etc., belonging to the thing I have. I only have what I can 
in some manner and within certain limits dispose of; in other 
words, in so far as I can be considered as a force, a being endowed 
with powers. We can only transmit what we have.' 

From this point I went on to consider the extremely difficult 

155 



question of whether there was anything in reality which we cannot 
transmit and in what manner it could be thought of. 

Here, then, is one approach, but it is not the only one. I cannot, 
for instance, concentrate my attention on what is properly called 
my body as distinct from the body-as-object considered by physi- 
ologists without coming once more upon this almost impene- 
trable notion of having. And yet, can I, with real accuracy, say that 
my body is something which I have? In the first place, can my 
body as such be called a thing? If I treat it as a thing, what is this T 
which so treats it? 'In the last analysis/ I wrote in the Journal Mtta- 
physique (p. 252), 'we end up with the formula: My body is (an 
object), I am nothing. Idealism has one further resource: it can 
declare that I am the act which posits the objective reality of my 
body. But is not this a mere sleight-of-hand? I fear so. The differ- 
ence between this sort of idealism and pure materialism amounts 
almost to nothing/ But we can go much deeper than this. In 
particular, we can show the consequences of such a mode of 
representation or imagination for our attitude towards death or 
suicide. 

Surely killing ourselves is disposing of our bodies (or lives) as 
though they are something we have, as though they are things. And 
surely this is an implicit admission that we belong to ourselves? 
But almost unfathomable perplexities then assail us: what is the 
self? What is this mysterious relation between the self and ourself ? 
It is surely clear that the relation is quite a different thing for the 
man who refuses to kill himself, because he does not recognise a 
right to do so, since he does not belong to himself. Beneath this 
apparently negligible difference of formulae, may we not perceive 
a kind of gulf which we cannot fill in, and can only explore a step 
at a dme? 

I limit myself to these two pointers. There may be others, and we 
shall notice them as they arise, or at least some of them. 

156 



It now becomes necessary to make an analysis. I must warn you 
that this analysis will not be a reduction. On the contrary; it will 
show us that we are here in the presence of a datum which is opaque 
and of which we may even be unable to take full possession. But 
the recognition of an irreducible is already an extremely important 
step in philosophy, and it may even effect a kind of change in the 
consciousness which makes it. 

We cannot, in fact, conceive of this irreducible without also 
conceiving of a Beyond, in which it is never resolved; and I think 
that the double existence of an irreducible and the Beyond goes far 
towards an exact definition of man's metaphysical condition. 

We should first notice that the philosophers seem to have always 
shown a sort of implicit mistrust towards the notion of having (I 
say 'notion', but we must ask whether this is a suitable expression, 
and I really think it is not). It almost looks as if the philosophers 
had on the whole turned away from having, as if it were an impure 
idea, essentially incapable of being made precise. 

The essential ambiguity of having should certainly be underlined 
from the very beginning. But I think that we cannot, at present, 
exempt ourselves from going on to the enquiry I am suggesting 
today. I was prosecuting this enquiry when I first came across Hcrr 
Gunter Stern's book Ueber das Haben (published at Bonn by Cohen, 
1928). I will content myself with quoting these few lines: 

'We have a body. We have. ... In ordinary talk we are perfectly 
clear about what we mean by this. And yet nobody has thought of 
turning his attention upon what, in common parlance, is intended 
by the word "have"; no one has attended to it as a complex of rela- 
tions, and asked himself in what having consists, simply as having.' 

Hcrr Stern rightly observes that when I say 'I have a body', I do 
not only mean 'I am conscious of my body': but neither do I mean 
something exists Which can be called my body'. It seems that there 
must be a middle term, a third kingdom. Herr Stern then plunges 

157 



into an analysis steeped in Husserl's terminology. I will not follow 
him there, especially as I know (for he has told me so himself) that 
the results of his" enquiry have now ceased to satisfy him. It is now 
time, I think, to proceed to the most direct explanation we can 
manage; and we must take care not to have recourse to the language 
of German phenomenologists, which is so often untranslatable. 

It may be asked why, in these circumstances, I have myself made 
use of the term phenomenology. 

I reply that the non-psychological character of such an enquiry 
as this must be emphasised as strongly as possible; for it really con- 
cerns the content of the thoughts which it is trying to bring out, so 
that they may expand in the light of reflection. 

I should like to start with the clearest examples I can, where 
having is plainly in its strongest and most exact sense. There are 
other cases where this sense (or perhaps we should more properly 
call it this emphasis) is weakened almost to vanishing point. Such 
limiting cases can and should be practically neglected (having 
headaches, for instance, having need, etc. the absence of the article 
is a revealing sign here). In cases of the first type, however, that is, 
in significant cases, it seems that we are right to distinguish two 
kinds, so long as we do not forget afterwards to ask ourselves about 
the relations between them. Having-as-possession can itself develop 
varieties that are very different, and arranged, as it were, in a hier- 
archy. But the possessive index is as clearly marked when I say, 'I 
have a bicycle/ as it is when I assert, 'I have my own views on that/ 
or even when I say (and this takes us in a slightly different direc- 
tion), *I have time to do so-and-so/ We will provisionally set aside 
having-as-implication. In all having-as-possession there does seem 
to be a certain content. That is too definite a word. Call it a certain 
quid relating to a certain qui who is treated as a centre of inherence or 
apprehension. I purposely abstain from the use 6f the word subject, 
because of the special meanings, whether logical or epistemological, 

158 



which it connotes: whereas it is our task and difficult for this very 
reason to try to blaze a trail for ourselves across territory outside 
the realms either of logic or of the theory of knowledge. 

Notice that the qui is from the first taken as in some degree trans- 
cendent to the quid. By transcendent I just mean that there is a 
difference of level or degree between the two of them, but I make no 
attempt to pronounce on the nature of that difference. It is as clear 
when I say, 'I have a bicycle/ or 'Paul has a bicycle', as when I say 
'James has very original ideas about that'. 

This is all perfectly simple. The position becomes more compli- 
cated when we observe that any assertion about having seems to be 
somehow built on the model of a kind of prototypical statement, 
where the qui is no other than myself. It looks as if having is only felt 
in its full force, and given its full weight, when it is within 'I have'. 
If a 'you have' or a 'he has' is possible, it is only possible in virtue 
of a kind of transference, and such a transference cannot be made 
without losing something in the process. 

This can be made somewhat clearer if we think of the relation 
which plainly joins possession to power, at any rate where the 
possession is actual and literal. Power is something which I experi- 
ence by exercising it or by resisting it after all, it comes to the same 
thing. 

I should be told here that having is often apt to reduce itself to the 
fact of containing. But even if we admit that this is so, the im- 
portant point must sail be made, that the containing itself cannot be 
defined in purely spatial terms. It seems to me always to imply the 
idea of a potentiality. To contain is to enclose; but to enclose is to 
prevent, to resist, and to oppose the tendency of the content towards 
spreading, spilling out, and escaping. 

And so I think that the objection, if it is one, turns, on a closer 
examination, against the man who makes it. 

At the heart of having, then, we can discern a kind of suppressed 

159 



dynamic, and suppression is certainly the key-word here. It is this 
which lights up what I call the transcendence of the qui. It is signifi- 
cant that the relation embodied in having is, grammatically, found 
to be intransitive. The verb 'to have* is only used in the passive in 
exceptional and specialised ways. It is as though we saw passing be- 
fore us a kind of irreversible progress from the qui towards the quid. 
Let me add that we are not here concerned with a mere step taken 
by the subject reflecting upon having. No, the progress seems to be 
carried out by the qui itself: it seems to be within the qui. Here we must 
pause for a moment, as we are drawing close to the central point. 

We can only express ourselves in terms of having when we are 
moving on a level where, in whatever manner and whatever degree 
of transposition, the contrast between within and without retains a 
meaning. 

This is completely applicable to having-as-implication, of which 
it is now time to say a few words. It is really perfectly clear that 
when I say, 'Such-and-such a body has such-and-such a property,' 
the property appears to me to be inside, or, as it were, rooted in the 
inside, of the body which it characterises. I observe, on the other 
hand, that we cannot think of implication without also thinking of 
force, however obscure the notion may be. I think that we cannot 
avoid representing the property or character as defining a certain 
efficacy, a certain essential energy. 

But we are not at the end of our investigations. 

Reflection will, in fact, now bring before our eyes the existence 
of a kind of dialectic of internality. To have can certainly mean, and 
even chiefly mean, to have for ones-self, to keep for one's-self, to hide. 
The most interesting and typical example is having a secret. But we 
come back at once to what I said about content. This secret is only 
a secret because I keep it; but also and at the same time, it is only a 
secret because I could reveal it. The possibility of betrayal or dis- 
covery is inherent in it, and contributes to its definition as a secret. 

160 



This is not a unique case; it can be verified whenever we are con- 
fronted with having in the strongest sense of the word. 

The characteristic of a possession is being shewablc. There is a 
strict parallel between having drawings by X in one's portfolios, 
which can be shewn to this or that visitor, and having ideas or 
opinion on this or that question. 

This act of shewing may take place or unfold before another or 
before oneVself. The curious thing is that analysis will reveal to us 
that this difference is devoid of meaning. In so far as I shew my 
own views to myself, I myself become someone else. That, I suppose, 
is the metaphysical basis for the possibility of expression. I can only 
express myself in so far as I can become someone else to myself. 

And now we see the transition take place from the first formula 
to the second one: we can only express ourselves in terms of having, 
when we are moving on a level implying reference to another taken 
as another. There is no contradiction between this formula and my 
remarks just now on 'I have*. The statement 'I have* can only be 
made over against another which is felt to be other. 

In so far as I conceive myself as having in myself, or more exactly, 
as mine, certain characteristics, certain trappings, I consider myself 
from the point of view of another but I do not separate myself 
from this other except after having first implicitly identified myself 
with him. When I say, for instance, 'I have my own opinion about 
that,' I imply, 'My opinion is not everybody's*; but I can only 
exclude or reject everybody's opinion if I have first, by a momentary 
fiction, assimilated it and made it mine. 

Having, therefore, is not found in the scale of purely interior 
relations, far from it. It would there be meaningless. It is found, 
rather, in a scale where externality and internality can no longer be 
really separated, any more than height and depth of musical tone. 
And here, I think, it is the tension between them that is important. 

We must now return to having-as-possession in its stria sense. 

L 161 M.B.H. 



Take the simplest case, possession of any object whatever, say a 
picture. From one point of view we should say that this object is 
exterior to its possessor. It is spatially distinct from him, and their 
destinies are also different. And yet this is only a superficial view. 
The stronger the emphasis placed on having and possession, the 
less permissible is it to harp upon this externality. It is absolutely 
certain that there is a link between the qui and the quid, and that this 
link is not simply an external conjunction. But in so far as this quid 
is a thing, and consequently subject to the changes and chances 
proper to things, it may be lost or destroyed. So it becomes, or is in 
danger of becoming, the centre of a kind of whirlpool of fears and 
anxieties, thus expressing exactly the tension which is an essential 
part of the order of having. 

It may be said that I can easily be indifferent to the fate of this or 
that object in my possession. But in that case, I should say that the 
possession is only nominal, or again, residual. 

It is, on the other hand, very important to notice that having 
already exists, in a most profound sense, in desire or in covetous- 
ness. To desire is in a manner to have without having. That is why 
there is a kind of suffering or burning which is an essential part of 
desire. It is really the expression of a sort of contradiction; it ex- 
presses the friction inseparable from an untenable position. There 
is also an absolute balance between covetousness and the pain I feel 
at the idea that I am going to lose what I have, what I thought I 
had, and what I have no longer. But if this is so, then it seems (a 
point we had noticed before) that having in some way depends 
upon time. Here again we shall find ourselves confronted with a 
kind of mysterious polarity. 

There is certainly a two-fold permanency in having: there is the 
permanency of the qui, and the permanency of the quid. But this 
permanency is, of its very nature, threatened. It is willed, or at least 
wished, and it slips from our grasp. The threat is the hold exerted 

162 



by the other qua other, the other which may be the world itself, and 
before which I so painfully feel that I am I. I hug to myself this 
thing which may be torn from me, and I desperately try to incor- 
porate it in myself, to form myself and it into a single and indis- 
soluble complex. A desperate, hopeless struggle. 

This brings us back to the body, and corporeity. The primary 
object with which I identify myself, but which still eludes me, is 
my own body. We may well think that we are here at the very 
heart of the mystery, in the very deepest recesses of having. The 
body is the typical possession. Or is it? 

Before pursuing this further, let us return once more to having - 
as-implication. In this, the characteristics to which I have been 
drawing attention seem to disappear. Let us go right to one extreme 
end of the ladder which links up abstract and concrete, and con- 
sider the statement, 'A certain geometrical figure has a certain 
property'. I confess that I cannot, without recourse to pure sophis- 
try, find in this anything at all like that tension between external 
and internal, that polarity of the same and the other. It is therefore a 
proper question whether, in taking Having into the very heart of 
essences for what I have just said of the geometrical figure seems 
to me to cover also the living body or species exhibiting certain 
characteristics we are not making a sort of unconscious transfer- 
ence which is in the last analysis unjustifiable. That point I will 
not press, at any rate not now, for it seems to me of secondary 
interest. But I think that the setting-up of my body as the typical 
possession marks an essential stage in metaphysical thought. 

Having as such is essentially something that affects the qui. It is 
never reduced, except in a completely abstract and ideal way, to 
something of which the qui can have the disposal. Always there is a 
sort of boomerang action, and nowhere is this clearer than in the 
case of my body, or of an instrument which is an extension of it, or 
which multiplies its powers. Perhaps this has some analogy with 

163 



the dialectic of the master and the slave as Hegel has defined it in 
The Phenomenology of the Mind. This dialectic has its spring in the 
tension without which real having does not and cannot exist. 

The point we are discussing now lies at the very heart of the 
world of every day, the world of daily experience with its dangers, 
its anxieties, and its techniques. At the heart of experience, but also 
at the heart of the unintelligible. For the fact must be faced, that 
this tension, this fateful double action, may at any moment turn 
our lives into a kind of incomprehensible and intolerable slavery. 

Before going further, let us once again sum up the position in 
which we stand. 

Normally, or (if you prefer it) usually, I find myself confronted 
with things: and some of these things have a relationship with me 
which is at once peculiar and mysterious. These things are not only 
external: it is as though there were a connecting corridor between 
them and me; they reach me, one might say, underground. In 
exact proportion as I am attached to these things, they are seen to 
exercise a power over me which my attachment confers upon them, 
and which grows as the attachment grows. There is one particular 
thing which really stands first among them, or which enjoys an 
absolute priority, in this respect, over them my body. The tyranny 
it exercises over me depends, by no means completely, but to a 
considerable degree, upon the attachment I have for it. But and 
this is the most paradoxical feature of the situation I seem, in the 
last resort, to be annihilating myself in this attachment, by sinking 
myself in this body to which I cling. It seems that my body literally 
devours me, and it is the same with all the other possessions which 
are somehow attached or hung upon my body. So that in the last 
analysis and this is a new point of view Having as such seems 
to have a tendency to destroy and lose itself in the very thing it began 
by possessing, but which now absorbs the master who thought he 
controlled it. It seems that it is of the very nature of my body, or of 

164 



my instruments in so far as I treat them as possessions, that they 
should tend to blot me out, although it is I who possess them. 

But if I think again, I shall see that this kind of dialectic is only 
possible if it starts from an act of desertion which makes it possible. 
And this observation at once opens up the way to a whole new 
region. 

And yet, what difficulties we find! What an array of possible 
objections! In particular, could it not be said, 'In so far as you treat 
the instrument as pure instrument, it has no power over you. You 
control it yourself and it does not react upon you/ This is perfectly 
true. But there is a division or interval, hardly measurable by 
thought, between having something, and controlling or using it: 
and the danger we are speaking of lies just in this division or 
interval. Spengler, in the very remarkable book he has just pub- 
lished on The Decisive Years and the state of the world today, some- 
where notices the distinction that I am getting at here. In speaking 
of investments or shares in companies, he emphasises the difference 
between pure having (das blosse Halen), and the responsible work 
of direction which falls to the head of the undertaking. Elsewhere 
he insists upon the contrast between money, treated as an abstract, 
in the mass (Wertmtngi)* and real property (Besitz), in a piece of 
land, for example. There is something in this to throw indirect light 
upon the difficult piece of thinking which I am now trying to 
explain. 'Our possessions eat us up,' I said just now: and it is truer 
of us, strangely enough, when we are in a state of inertia in face of 
objects which are themselves inert, but falser when we are more 
vitally and actively bound up with something serving as the im- 
mediate subject-matter of a personal creative act, a subject-matter 
perpetually renewed. (It may be the garden of the keen gardener, 
the farm of a farmer, the violin of a musician, or the laboratory of a 
scientist.) In all these cases, we may say, having tends, not to be 
destroyed, but to be sublimated and changed into being. 

165 



Wherever there is pure creation, having as such is transcended 
or etherialised within the creative act: the duality of possessor and 
possessed is lost in a living reality. This demands the most concrete 
illustration we can think of, and not mere examples taken from the 
category of material possessions. I am thinking in particular of such 
pseudo-possessions as my ideas and opinions. In this case, the word 
'have* takes on a meaning which is at once positive and threatening. 
The more I treat my own ideas, or even my convictions, as some- 
thing belonging to me and so as something I am proud of (un- 
consciously perhaps) as I might be proud of my greenhouse or my 
stables the more surely will these ideas and opinions tend, by their 
very inertia (or my inertia towards them, which comes to the same 
thing) to exercise a tyrannical power over me; that is the principle 
of fanaticism in all its shapes. What happens in the case of the 
fanatic, and in other cases too, it seems, is a sort of unjustified 
alienation of the subject the use of the term is unavoidable here 
in face of the thing, whatever it may be. That, in my opinion, is 
the difference between the ideologist, on the one hand, and the 
thinker or artist on the other. The ideologist is one of the most 
dangerous of all human types, because he is unconsciously en- 
slaved to a pan of himself which has mortified, and this slavery is 
bound to manifest itself outwardly as tyranny. There, by the way, 
may be seen a connexion which deserves serious and separate 
examination. The thinker, on the other hand, is continually on 
guard against this alienation, this possible fossilising of his thought. 
He lives in a continual state of creativity, and the whole of his 
thought is always being called in question from one minute to the 
next. 

This throws light, I think, on what I have left to say. The man 
who remains on the plane of having (or of desire) is centred, either 
on himself or on another treated as another; the result is the same in 
cither case, so far as the tension or polarity goes which I was 

166 



emphasising just now. This point needs a much more detailed 
development than I can give it at present. The notion of the self, 
and of one's-self, should really be firmly seized upon. We should 
then realise that, contrary to the belief of many idealists, particularly 
the philosophers of consciousness, the self is always a thickening, a 
sclerosis, and perhaps who knows? a sort of apparently spiritu- 
alised expression (an expression 0/"an expression) of the body, not 
taken in the objective sense but in the sense of my body in as far as 
it is mine, in so far as my body is something I have. Desire is at the 
same time auto-centric and hetero-centric; we might say that it 
appears to itself to be hetero-centric when it is really auto-centric, but 
its appearing so is itself a fact. But we know very well that it is 
possible to transcend the level of the self and the other; it is trans- 
cended both in love and in charity. Love moves on a ground which 
is neither that of the self, nor that of the other qua other; I call it the 
Thou. I should think a more philosophical designation would be 
better, if it could be found; but at the same time I do think that 
abstract terms here might betray us, and land us once more in the 
region of the other, the He. 

Love, in so far as distinct from desire or as opposed to desire, love 
treated as the subordination of the self to a superior reality, a 
reality at my deepest level more truly me than I am myself love as 
the breaking of the tension between the self and the other, appears 
to me to be what one might call the essential ontological datum. I 
think, and will say so by the way, that the science of ontology will 
not get out of the scholastic rut until it takes full cognisance of the 
fact that love comes first. 

Along these lines, I think, we can see what is to be understood 
by the uncharacterisable. I said that, underlying our mental picture 
of things, as subjects possessing predicates or characteristics, there 
must be a transference. It seems plain to me that the distinction 
between v the thing and its characteristics cannot have any meta- 

167 



physical bearing: it is, shall we say, purely phenomenal. Notice, 
too, that characteristics can only be asserted in an order which 
admits of the use of the word 'also*. The characteristic is picked out 
from others; but at the same time, we cannot say that the thing is a 
collection of characteristics. Characteristics cannot be juxtaposed, 
and we do not juxtapose them except in so far as we ignore their 
specifying function and treat them as units or homogeneous entities; 
but that is a fiction which does not bear examination. I can, 
strictly speaking, treat an apple, a bullet, a key, and a ball of string 
as objects of the same nature, and as a sum of units. But it is quite 
different with the smell of a flower and its colour, or the consistency, 
flavour and digestibility of a dish. In so far, then, as characterisa- 
tion consists in enumerating properties, placing one beside the 
other, it is an absolutely external proceeding; it misleads us, and 
never, in any circumstances, gives us the least opportunity of reach- 
ing the heart of that reality which we are trying to characterise. But, 
speaking philosophically, the really important point to recognise is 
that characterisation implies a certain setting of myself in front of 
the other, and (if I may say so) a sort of radical banishment or 
cutting-offof me from it. I myself bring about this banishment, by 
myself implicitly coming to a halt, separating myself, and treating 
myself (though I probably am not conscious of so doing) as a thing 
bounded by its outlines. It is only in relation to this implicitly 
limited thing that I can pkce whatever I am trying to characterise. 

It is plain that the will to characterise implies, in the man who is 
exerdng it, a belief at once sincere and illusory that he can make 
abstraction from himself qua himself. The Leibnizian idea ofcbarac- 
teristica universalis shows us how far this pretenthn can go. But I am 
inclined to think that we forget how untenable, metaphysically 
speaking, is the position of a thought which believes that it can 
place itself over against things in order to grasp them. It can 
certainly develop a system of taking its bearings by things, a system 

168 



of increasing and even infinite complexity: but its aim is to let the 
essence of things go. 

To say that reality is perhaps uncharacterisable is certainly to 
make an ambiguous and apparently contradictory pronouncement, 
and we must be careful not to interpret it in a way which conforms 
with the principles of present-day agnosticism. This means :-If I 
adopt that attitude to Reality, which all efforts to characterise it 
would presuppose, I at once cease to apprehend it qua Reality: it 
slips away from my eyes, leaving me face to face with no more than 
its ghost. I am deceived by the inevitable coherence of this ghost, 
and so sink into self-satisfaction and pride, when in fact I ought 
rather to be attacked by doubts of the soundness of my undertaking. 

Characterisation is a certain kind of possession, or claim to 
possession, of that which cannot be possessed. It is the construction 
of a little abstract effigy, a model as English physicists call it, of a 
reality which will not lend itself to these tricks, these deceptive 
pretences, except in the most superficial way. Reality will only play 
this game with us in so far as we cut ourselves off from it, and 
consequently are guilty of self-desertion. 

I think, therefore, that as we raise ourselves towards Reality, and 
approach it more nearly, we find that it cannot be compared with 
an object placed before us on which we can take bearings: and we 
find, too, that we are ourselves actually changed in the process. If, 
as I believe, there is an ascending scale of dialectic, in a sense not so 
essentially different as one might suppose from the Platonic doc- 
trine, then this dialectic is two-fold, and relates not only to reality 
but also to the being who apprehends it. I cannot, at this time, go 
into the nature of such a dialectic. I will be content to point out 
that such a philosophy would give a totally new direction to the 
doctrine, for example, of the Divine Attributes. I confess that, 
to myself at any rate, the attributes of God are exactly what 
certain post-Kantians have called Grentzlegriff. If Being is more 

169 



uncharacterisable (i.e. more unpossessable and more transcendent 
in every way) in proportion as it has more Being, then the attri- 
butes can do no more than express and translate, in terms that are 
completely inadequate, the fact that Absolute Being is as a whole 
rebellious to descriptions which will never fit anything but what 
has less Being. They will only fit an object before which we can 
place ourselves, reducing ourselves, to some extent, to its measure, 
and reducing it to ours. God can only be given to me as Absolute 
Presence in worship; any idea I form of Him is only an abstract 
expression or intellectualisation of the Presence. I must never fail to 
remember this, when I try to handle such thoughts; otherwise the 
thoughts will suffer distortion in my sacrilegious hands. 

And so we come at last to what is for me the essential distinction 
the central point of my essay on The Ontological Mystery, to be 
published in a few days the distinction between problem and 
mystery, already presupposed in the paper you have just heard. 

I venture to read now a passage from a paper delivered last year 
to the Marseilles Philosophical Society. It will appear in a few days 
from now as the appendix to a play, le Monde Cassf. 1 

'In turning my attention to what one usually thinks of as onto- 
logical problems, such as Does Being exist? What is Being? etc., I 
came to observe that I cannot think about these problems without 
seeing a new gulf open beneath my feet, namely, This I, I who ask 
questions about being, can I be sure that I exist? What qualifica- 
tions have I for pursuing these inquiries? If I do not exist, how can 
I hope to bring them to a conclusion? Even admitting that I do 
exist, how can I be assured that I do? In spite of the thought which 
comes first into my head, I do not think that Descartes' cogto can be 
of any help to us here. The co&ito, as I have written elsewhere, is at 
the mere threshold of validity; the subject of the coyto is the epistem- 
ological subject. Cartesianism implies a severance, which may 
1 Published by Desclfc de Brouwer. 
170 



be fatal anyhow, between intellect and life; its result is a deprecia- 
tion of the one, and an exaltation of the other, both arbitrary. There 
is here an inevitable ihythm only too familiar to us, for which we 
are bound to find an explanation. It would certainly not be proper 
to deny the legitimacy of making distinctions of order within the 
unity of a living subject, who thinks and strives to think of himself. 
But the ontological problem can only arise beyond such distinc- 
tions, and for the living being grasped in his full unity and 
vitality. 

This leads us to ask what conditions are involved in the idea of 
working out a problem. Wherever a problem is found, I am work- 
ing upon data placed before me; but at the same time, the general 
state of affairs authorises me to carry on as if I had no need to trouble 
myself with this Me who is at work: he is here simply presupposed. 
It is, as we have just seen, quite a different matter when the inquiry 
is about Being. Here the ontological status of the questioner be- 
comes of the highest importance. Could it be said, then, that I am 
involving myself in an infinite regress? No, for by the very act of so 
conceiving the regress, I am placing myself above it. I am recog- 
nising that the whole reflexive process remains within a certain 
assertion which I am rather than which I pronounce an asser- 
tion of which I am the place, and not the subject. Thereby we 
advance into the realm of the metaproblematic, that is, of mystery. 
A mystery is a problem which encroaches upon its own data and 
invades them, and so is transcended qua problem/ 

We cannot now go on to make further developments, indispen- 
sible though they are. I will limit myself to one example in order to 
give definiteness to my conceptions, and that shall be the mystery of 
evil. 

I am naturally inclined to consider evil as a disorder which I 
look into; I try to make out its causes, the reason for its existence, 
and even its hidden ends. How is it that this machine is so defective 

171 



in its functioning? Or is this apparent defect due to a defect, not 
apparent but real, in my own vision, a kind of spiritual presbyopia 
or astigmatism? If so, the real disorder would lie in myself, and yet 
would remain objective in relation to the mental censorship which 
unmasked it. But evil simply recognised, or even contemplated, 
ceases to be evil suffered, in fact I think it simply ceases to be evil. I 
only really grasp it as evil in proportion as it touches me; that is, 
where I am involved in it in the sense that one is involved in busi- 
ness. This being involved is fundamental, and I can only discount 
it by an act of the mind, legitimate in some cases, but fictional, and 
which I must not allow to deceive me. 

Traditional philosophy has tended to reduce the mystery of evil 
to the problem of evil. That is why, when it touches realities of this 
kind evil, love and death it so often gives the impression of being 
a game, or a kind of intellectual sleight-of-hand. The more idealist 
the philosophy, the more strong the impression; for the thinking 
subject is then more deeply intoxicated with an emancipation 
which is in fact deceptive. 

I ought now (though there is hardly time) to go over the whole of 
the first part of my paper, and try to shew how light can be thrown 
upon it by these distinctions. It seems clear to me that the realm of 
having is identical with the realm of the problematic and at the 
same time, of course, with the realm where technics can be used. 
The metaproblematic is in fact metatechnical. Every technic pre- 
supposes a group of previously made abstractions which are the 
condition of its working; it is powerless where full-blooded Being 
is in question. This point might be drawn out in several directions. 
At the root of having, as also at the root of the problem or the tech- 
nic, there lies a certain specialisation or specification of the self, 
and this is connected with that partial alienation of the self which 
I mentioned earlier. And this brings us to the examination of a 
distinction which, to me, seems extremely important and with 

172 



which I will end this already overloaded lecture I mean the dis- 
tinction between autonomy and freedom. 

It is essential to note that autonomy is above all the negation of 
a heteronomy presupposed and rejected. 'I want to run my own life* 
that is the radical formula of autonomy. It is here that we can sec 
that tension between the Same and the Other, which is the very 
pulse of the world of having. We should further recognise, I think, 
that autonomy bears on any realm which admits of administration, 
however conceived. It in fact implies the idea of a certain sphere of 
activity, and can be more closely defined when this sphere can be 
closely circumscribed in space and time. Anything in the nature of 
interests, whatever the interests are, can be treated with relative ease 
as a sphere or district with fixed boundaries. And further, I can, to 
a great extent, treat my own life as capable of being administered by 
another or by myself (myself here meaning the not-other). I can 
administer anything which admits the comparison, however in- 
direct, with a fortune or possession. But it is quite different when 
the category of having can no longer be applied, for then I can no 
longer talk of administration in any sense, and so cannot speak of 
autonomy. Take, for example, the realm of literary or artistic 
talents. To a certain extent a talent may be administered, when its 
possessor has taken the measure of it, when his talent resides in him 
as a possession. But for genius, properly so-called, the idea of such 
administration is a complete contradiction; for it is of the essence of 
genius to be always outrunning itself and spilling over in all direc- 
tions. A man is a genius, but has talent (the expression 'to have 
genius' is literally meaningless). I really think that the idea of auto- 
nomy, whatever we may have thought of it, is bound up with a 
kind of reduction or particularisation of the subject. The more I 
enter into the whole of an activity with the whole of myself, the less 
legitimate it is to say that I am autonomous. In this sense, the philo- 
sopher is less autonomous than the scientist, and the scientist less 

173 



autonomous than the technician. The man who is most autono- 
mous is, in a certain sense, most fully involved. Only this non- 
autonomy of the philosopher or the great artist is not hetcronomy any 
more than love is hetero-centricity. It is rooted in Being, at a point 
either short of self or beyond self, and in a sphere which transcends 
all possible possession; the sphere, indeed, which I reach in con- 
templation or worship. And, in my view, this means that such 
non-autonomy is very freedom. 

It is not our business here even to outline a theory of freedom, if 
only because we should have to begin by asking whether the idea 
of a theory of freedom did not imply contradiction. Here I will 
point out just one thing: the self-evident truth that in the scale of 
sanctity and of artistic creation, where freedom glows with its fullest 
light, it is never autonomy. For the saint and the artist alike, auto- 
centricity and the self are entirely swallowed up in love. We might 
perhaps seize this opportunity to show that most of the defects of 
Kant's philosophy are essentially bound up with the fact that he 
had no suspicion of all this; he never saw that the self can and 
should be transcended without there being any need for heter- 
onomy to replace autonomy in consequence. 

I must come to a conclusion, and this is not easy. I will simply 
return to my preliminary formula. I said then that we should end 
by the recognition of an irreducible, but that we should also find 
something beyond this irreducible; and I said that such a duality 
seemed to me part of the very nature of man's metaphysical condi- 
tion. What is this irreducible? I do not think that we can, properly 
speaking, define it, but we can in some measure locate it. It is the 
ontological deficiency proper to the creature, or at least to the fallen 
creature. This deficiency is essentially a kind of inertia, but apt to 
turn into a son of negative activity, and it cannot be eliminated. On 
the contrary, our first task is to recognise it. It makes possible a 
certain number of autonomous and subordinate disciplines; each of 



them certainly representing danger to the unity of the creature in so 
far as it tends to absorb it, but each also having its own worth, and 
partial justification. And therefore it is also necessary that these 
activities and autonomous functions should be balanced and 
harmonised by the central activities. In these, man is recalled into 
the presence of mystery, that mystery which is the foundation of his 
very being, and apart from which he is nothingness: the grand 
mystery of religion, art and metaphysic. 



175 



PART TWO 
FAITH AND REALITY 



M M.B.H. 



I 

SOME REMARKS ON THE 
IRRELIGION OF TODAY 1 

I shall do my best today to define the attitude of mind which 
regards the religious question simply as obsolete. This attitude 
demands a careful definition. 

It is not necessarily the same thing to say that the religious question 
is obsolete and to deny that a religious datum persists, provided that 
the datum belongs to the realm of feeling. By definition, this datum 
could not be obsolete; but a custom or idea can be obsolete, and so 
can a belief in so far as it can be treated as an idea. There would also 
be no point in denying that religion needs explanation when 
regarded as a fact, i.e. as a body of institutions, rites, etc.; it would 
indeed be absurd to try. (It is even worth noticing that with a 
certain type of mind, the greater its separation from any kind of 
religious life, the greater also is its curiosity about the origin of so 
strange and diverse a set of phenomena, and about the reason for its 
obviously important place in human history.) When people say 
'The religious question is obsolete', they mean 'there is no longer 
any point in asking whether the assertions of religion correspond 
with anything in reality. There is no point in asking whether a 
Being exists having the attributes traditionally connected with the 
word God; nor whether salvation, as believers call it, is anything 
but a certain form of subjective experience which they clumsily 
interpret in terms of myth. Everybody/ they add, 'will realise why/ 
I shall here quote a passage from Bertrand Russell, as it seems to me 

1 Lecture delivered on December 4th, 1930, to the Ffdfrathn des 
Associations d'tudiants cbrttiens. 

179 



most significant. 'That Man is the product of causes which had no 
prevision of the end they were achieving; that his origin, his 
growth, his hopes and fears, his loves and his beliefs, are but the 
outcome of accidental collocations of atoms; that no fire, no hero- 
ism, no intensity of thought and feeling can preserve an individual 
life beyond the grave; that all the labours of the ages, all the devo- 
tion, all the inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human 
genius, are destined to extinction in the vast death of the solar 
system, and that the whole temple of Man's achievement must in- 
evitably be buried beneath the debris of a universe in ruins all 
these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so nearly certain, 
that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to stand/ 1 

Russell's private religious beliefs do not, of course, concern us 
here. The interest of the passage lies rather in its being a typical 
statement of the negative creed implied in the attitude we set out to 
examine. There are undeniably some people who claim that you 
can found a religion even upon this cosmic despair. I must say that 
I cannot see how this can be maintained without a shocking mis- 
use of terms, and one day I will explain why. 

Perhaps it will throw a little light on the tortuous path down 
which I am going to take you, if I mention at once that I propose 
to work from three consecutive points of view three distinct posi- 
tions, or three steps in a scale. They are: (i) the point of view of 
pure rationalism, or the philosophy of Enlightenment; (2) applied 
science, or rather, the philosophy of applied science; (3) the philo- 
sophy founded on the supremacy of Life, or the Vital Principle. 

First, let us look at the peculiar idea of modernity involved in the 

sort of rationalism we are trying to describe. 'Today,* they say, 'it is 

no longer possible to believe in miracles or the Incarnation.' 'A 

man of 1930 cannot possibly accept the doctrine of the resurrection 

of the body/ These arc examples taken at random. The interesting 

1 Philosophical Essays, p. 60. 

1 80 



thing about them, to me, is their emphasis on the date, which is 
treated as a point of view, one might almost say a specially favour- 
able position for seeing things call it, if you like, an observatory. 
They seem to be representing Time or History as a space containing 
fields of unequal quality; and accordingly they use epithets like 
'advanced' and * retrograde* to imply approval and disapproval; such 
epithets are a striking feature of the political psychology of our own 
country. They will be quite ready to admit the fact that the latest 
phase in time may show a falling-back by comparison with the 
previous stage. This is to be expected, because enlightened minds 
may find themselves mixed up with reactionary ones at some partic- 
ular point in time. A power-problem may arise, and the reaction- 
aries may get the upper hand for the moment, so that there is an 
apparent setback. But they assure us that it will not kst; sooner or 
later the human mind will set out again on its victorious march 
towards the light. 'The light/ A word (or conception in the vaguest 
sense of the term) whose importance cannot be over-estimated. I 
believe that if we really thought about it, we should find it to be the 
expression secularised and stripped to the last ounce of meaning 
of an idea worked out by the Greeks and still more by the Fathers 
of the Church. We will not press the point at present. Their 
manner of presenting this idea of progressive enlightenment is two- 
fold: sometimes it is ethical-political (the word obscurantism being 
very significant here) and sometimes technical-scientific. The two 
aspects are closely bound up with each other. 

The first point to notice is this. A philosophy of enlightenment is 
almost bound to make capital of the popular trick of comparing 
humanity, considered throughout the whole of its history, with a 
single person passing from childhood to adolescence, from adol- 
escence to manhood, and so on. The enlightened mind regards itself 
as an adult, who can no longer allow himself the pleasure of repeat- 
ing the nursery stories that so delighted his childish age. But this is 

181 



an oversimplified picture, and open to the gravest objections. We 
might well ask whether childhood has not its own peculiar values 
a happy trustfulness, a peculiar candour which the grown man 
should preserve at all costs, unless he is to land up at a dogmatism 
dictated by experience and unable to bear him any fruit but jejune 
cynicism. Many great truths come into play in this connection, and 
have been admirably expounded by such writers as Peguy. 

And there is a second point, sail more important. Most people 
would agree without question that the progress of enlightenment 
cannot take place without a progressive elimination of the anthropo- 
centric element. They enlist on their side the wonders of modern 
astronomy, thus: 'Before Copernicus and Galileo', they say, 'it was 
perfectly natural to think that the Earth was the centre of the Uni- 
verse, and that man occupied a special position in what they still 
called Creation. But astronomy has put the Earth and Man in their 
proper perspective. Now we can see that the place they occupy is 
almost infinitesimal compared with the immense size of the visible 
universe/ All this seems aimed at taking down the simple-minded 
and ridiculous pride of mankind, which thought itself the supreme 
expression and perhaps ultimate purpose of the cosmos. 

But please notice at once that this philosophy only seems to be 
satirising human pride, in spite of its foundation of positive cos- 
mology. It is in fact exalting it. There is a shift of position, and what 
an extraordinary one it is! It is true that Man regarded as an object 
of science is thrust back into the ranks, a mere object among an 
infinite crowd of other objects. But Man still possesses one thing 
that claims to transcend the material world to which he is reduced 
Science. We will not call it Human Science, for these philo- 
sophers are doing their best to dehumanise and deracinate Science, 
and consider it by itself in its intrinsic movement. So they will talk 
to us of Mind and Thought (in capitals). It would be a mistake 
not to take the capitals seriously, because they exactly express the 

182 



attempt to depersonalise Mind and Thought. They are no longer 
somebody's mind, or somebody's thought; they are no longer 
presences. They are a sort of ideal system, with a free range and 
flexibility of their own, as the philosophers will be at pains to point 
out. A writer like M. Brunschwicg who has done more than any- 
one now alive to build up this rationalism (this spirituality, as he, 
in my opinion, quite wrongly, calls it) such a man, I say, as M. 
Brunschwicg, is very far from believing that this development of 
Mind or Science is the unfolding in Time of an absolute Principle, 
existing for itself through all Eternity, like Aristotle's Nous or 
Hegel's Absolute Mind. To him, Nous and Absolute Mind are just 
metaphysical fictions. The Mind of his own panegyrics is still called 
God, but it is devoid of all attributes which can give the word any 
meaning. 'No doubt', he concedes at the end of his book on The 
Progress of Consciousness, 'No doubt a God who has no point of 
contact with any uniquely important event in space or time, a God 
who has taken no initiative and assumed no responsibility for the 
physical aspect of the Universe; who has willed neither the ice of 
the poles nor the heat of the tropics; who cares neither for the 
hugeness of the elephant nor the minuteness of the ant; neither for 
the destructive action of the microbe nor the constructive reaction 
of the globule; a God who never dreams of punishing the sins of 
ourselves or our ancestors; who knows no more of perjured men 
than of rebellious angels; who grants success neither to the predic- 
tion of the prophet nor to the miracle of the magician; a God who 
has no dwelling-place either in Earth or Heaven, who can be 
perceived at no special point in history, who speaks no language 
and can be translated into none: this God, to the primitive mentality 
or the coarse supernaturalism so clearly professed by William 
James, is what he would call an abstract ideal. But for a thought 
which has travelled further away from its own beginnings, a 
thought which has become subtler and more highly trained, this 

183 



God is one who abstracts himself from nothing and for whom 
nothing is abstract, since concrete reality is only what it is through 
its intrinsic truth-value/ An important passage, worthy of serious 
consideration. We are aware throughout of the far more terrible 
pride of the man who thanks God that he is free from the primitive 
mentality, and rejoices in his adult status without misgiving. 
Remember the phrases I have quoted to you already, 'In our time 
it is no longer permissible . . ."; 'A man of 1930 could not allow . . / 
and so on. 

But take care. If, in the eyes of a Christian philosopher like Saint 
Bonaventure, Man appeared to be the centre of the Universe, he 
was so only as being an image of God. 'Essc imapnem Dei, 9 he 
writes, 'non est bomini accident, sedpotius substantiate, sicut esse vestigium 
nulli accidit creaturae* (To be an image of God is not accidental to 
man but of his essence, just as it cannot be an accident to a foot- 
print to have been imprinted.) Plainly, the 'ridiculous anthropo- 
centric attitude* is really just applied theocentrism. To Saint Augus- 
tine, Saint Thomas and Saint Bonaventure, God is the centre, and 
God alone. But today it is the human mind, dehumanised, stripped 
of all power, all presence, and all existence, and then put in God's 
place to act as His substitute. 

It is plainly very difficult to think one's way into such a philo- 
sophy. Its initiates are few. I am sure that most people who think 
the religious question obsolete would not subscribe to it, but would 
prefer to adopt an agnosticism modelled on Spencer or a materi- 
alism such as Le Dantec's. This is, of course, worse from a specula- 
tive point of view, but it finds more numerous and firmer footholds 
in our minds. What are the footholds of a doctrine like M. 
Brunschwicg's? Pride, first of all, and I am not afraid to say so. I 
shall be contradicted; they will say that it is not personal pride, for 
the Mind they are telling us about is not the Mind of an individual. 
My first answer is, that it is, or tries to be, the Mind of everybody. 

184 



And we know very well, from Plato onwards, what a deal of 
flattery democracy will allow itselfand this idealism, after ail, is 
simply transposed democracy. And that is not all. The idealist is 
bound in the end to substitute himself for the Mind and then we 
have an individual to deal with. Let us confront him with the (as 
he thinks) shocking spectacle of a Christian astronomer. How can 
an astronomer believe in the Incarnation or go to Mass? The 
idealist's only hope is to put up a distinction. As an astronomer, 
this monster (or rather this amphibian) is a man of the twentieth 
century and the idealist can greet him as a contemporary. As a man 
who believes in the Incarnation, however, and goes to Mass, he is 
behaving like a mediaeval or a child; and this is a pity. When 
we ask the philosopher to justify his extraordinary dichotomy, he 
may call upon Reason and Mind till he is black in the face, but he 
will not convince us; especially when we see that he does not 
scruple to use psychological and even sociological arguments to 
account for these survivals in the astronomer, while he absolutely 
forbids us turn such arguments or analyses upon himself. He is a 
man of 1930 from top to toe. And yet he is still invoking an 
Eternal Mind, but a Mind which has none the less been born; 
who Its next incarnation will be, Heaven only knows. Frankly, I 
find all this extremely incoherent. If a Marxist, for example, were 
to tackle the idealist and tell him plainly that his Mind was a 
purely bourgeois product begotten of economic leisure, the idealist 
would have to take refuge in the realm of completely bloodless 
abstractions. I think myself that idealism of this kind cannot help 
being cornered, with concrete religious philosophy hemming it in 
on one side, and historical materialism on the other. For it is in fact 
impotent when confronted with history any real history, even if it 
is just the history of a single life. It has no feeling for tragedy, and 
(what is worse) no feeling for flesh and blood either. Personally, I 
think that people who substitute the Cartesian concept of matter 

185 



for the richly confused idea ofthefesh which is embedded in all 
Christian philosophy are doing anything but progressing in their 
metaphysics. There is an almost untouched task here, and pure 
metaphysicians would do well to focus all their attention upon it, 
or so I think: the task of describing the evolution and progressive 
confusion of the notions of flesh and fleshly existence in the history 
of philosophical thought. 

At bottom, this idealism is a purely professorial doctrine, and 
falls directly under Schopenhauer's partially unjust criticism of the 
academic philosophers of his day. (It was partially unjust, because 
there is a real feeling for concreteness and human drama in such 
writers as Schelling and Hegel.) 

In point of faq, philosophical idealism would very likely have 
had no appreciable effect upon the development of human thought, 
had it not found a redoubtable ally in all forms of applied science. 
I believe that the spirit of applied science is really in itself the most 
serious obstacle, for many perfectly candid minds, to the acceptance 
of the notion of religious life, or rather religious truth. 

Some rather complicated considerations arise here, and you must 
forgive me if my analysis seems somewhat over-subtle. I think we 
have reached the crux of the whole problem. 

By 'applied science* I mean, in a general way, any branch of 
learning which tends to guarantee to man the mastery of a definite 
object. And so any applied science can obviously be regarded as 
manipulation, as a way of handling or moulding a given matter. 
(The matter itself may belong to the mind, as in the science of 
history or psychology.) 

Several points here arc worth considering, (i) A science can be 
defined by the various handles which its object offers it. But con- 
versely, an object itself is only an object in virtue of the handles it 
offers us, and this is true upon the most elementary level, of simple 
external perception. For this reason there is a parallel between 

1 8(5 



advance in science ana advance in objectivity. j\n ooject is more 
of an object, more exposed if I may put it like that, when the sciences 
under which it falls are more numerous or more developed. 

(2) An applied science is in its very nature perfectible. It can 
always be brought to a higher and higher point of accuracy and 
adjustment. I would myself add that the inverse is also true, and 
that nowhere else but in the realm of applied science can we speak 
of perfectibility and progress in an absolutely strict sense. In this 
realm alone can perfection be measured, since it is equivalent to 
output. 

(3) This last point is perhaps most important of all. We are 
becoming more and more aware that all power, in the human sense 
of the word, implies the use of applied science. The simple-minded 
optimism of the masses today is founded on this fact. No one could 
deny that the existence of aeroplanes and wireless sets seems to the 
vast majority of our contemporaries to be the proof or palpable 
gauge of progress. 

But we should notice the reverse side too the price paid for such 
victories. From the scientific point of view, the world in which we 
live is apt to look at one moment like a mere field for development, 
and at the next like a subjugated slave. Any newspaper article 
about a disaster is full of the implicit suggestion that the monster 
we thought we had tamed is breaking out and taking its revenge. 
This is the point where applied science links up with idealism. Man 
is treated now not as Mind but as technical power, and appears as 
the sole citadel of orderly arrangement in a world which is un- 
worthy of him; a world which has not deserved him, and has to all 
appearance produced him quite haphazard or rather, he has 
wrenched himself out of it by a violent act of emancipation. That is 
the full meaning of the Prometheus myth. I dare say a great many 
technicians would shrug their shoulders to hear so strange a myth- 
ology kid at their door. But if they are simply technicians and 

187 



nothing more, what can they do about it? Nothing. They can only 
immure themselves in the fortress of their own specialised know- 
ledge, and refuse, in fact if not in words, to tackle the problem of 
unifying the world or reality. Some attempts at synthesis will, of 
course, be made, because the desire to unify is in fact irresistibly 
strong, indeed it may be the very foundation of intellectual life. But 
if you compare these syntheses with the sciences themselves, they will 
always look relatively adventitious. 'They seem to be rather in the 
air/ we should say; an everyday phrase which wonderfully ex- 
presses the lack of footholds offered by pure synthesis compared with 
specialised science. From now onwards a shadow seems to spread 
over reality and make it more and more obscure. We can now only 
make out that there are different regions; they are sail in the light, 
but the way from one to another is obscured. And that is not the 
worst. We cannot be fooled by words. The scientific power must 
belong to somebody, surely? since somebody must exercise it. But 
who is this 'subject'? We come back again to our former conclu- 
sions. The subject will himself be seen as the object of possible 
sciences. The sciences are distinct and multiple, joined by hardly 
definable connections. It naturally follows and experience fully 
proves that the sciences themselves are less effective as sciences in 
proportion as they come to bear on realms where these water-tight 
compartments can no longer hold. That is why the sciences of 
psychology and psychiatry at present show such disappointing 
results. 

But now we are faced with an appalling and quite unavoidable 
problem. The subject who lies in his turn at the mercy (if I may so 
phrase it) of applied science cannot be a source of clarity or a centre 
of radiation; on the contrary, he can only enjoy a reflected light, a 
light borrowed from objects, since the sciences to be applied to him 
will inevitably be constructed on the model of the sciences directed 
upon the external world. They will therefore be the same in charac- 

188 



tcr, although transposed and inverted. To the admirable criticism 
of Bergson, the most lasting part of his work, I need only allude; I 
am sure there is no need for me to go into details. But it might be 
worth making just one further observation. Where the sciences thus 
extend their sway in all directions, there is one part of the subject 
and therefore of concrete reality which cannot be overrun, 
namely, the immediate feelings of pleasure and pain. And hand- 
in-hand with the amazing development of science, there goes, as we 
should expect, an intensification of the most immediate and also 
most elementary part of our affective life: call it the desire for a 
'gogd time* if you will. I do not mean that this connection is an 
absolute rule or that it can be made good in every case. But in 
practice we do find that the two things go together, and a little 
general observation and thought will convince us that this is so. We 
do find in fact that unusually high development of the applied 
sciences goes with great impoverishment of our inner lives. The 
lack of proportion between the apparatus at the disposal of huma- 
nity and the ends it is called upon to realise seems more and more 
outrageous. I am sure to be told that the individual in the scientific 
state tends to be subordinated to social ends which go far beyond 
him; but is this really so? We have often heard the sociological 
sophistry that the whole contains more than the sum of its parts. 
But the truth is that although it undoubtedly contains something 
other than they do, all the evidence seems to show that the difference 
falls on the debit side and is expressible by a minus sign. There is 
no reason why a society of dunces, whose individual ideal is the 
spasmodic jigging of the dance-hall or the thrill of the sentimental 
and sensational film, should be anything more than a dunce so- 
ciety. It is obviously the inferior or rudimentary qualities in these 
individuals which draw them together. There is the difference, by 
the way, between a society like this and a community like the 
Church; for there the individuals do not swarm together mechani- 

189 



cally, but do form a whole which transcends them. Such a commu- 
nity, however, is only possible because its members have each ol 
them managed to keep inviolate that inner citadel called the soul, to 
which all sciences as such are opposed. To my mind, the most 
serious objection that can be raised to such a doctrine as Marxism 
is this: that it can maintain itself only in the struggle for its own 
supremacy; as soon as it is supreme, it destroys itself and makes way 
for nothing better than coarse hedonism. That is why many of the 
young people whom you see among you today, professing to be 
Communists, would, I am sure, go over to the Opposition at once 
if Communism were to win the day. 

These criticisms bring us indirectly to the definition of an order 
which stands in sharp and complete contrast to the world of applied 
sciences. Pure religion, religion as distinct from magic and opposed 
to it, is the exact contrary of an applied science; for it constitutes a 
realm where the subject is confronted with something over which 
he can obtain no hold at all. If the word transcendence describes 
anything whatever, it must be this the absolute, impassable gulf 
which opens between the soul and Being whenever Being refuses 
us a hold. No gesture is more significant than the joined hands of 
the believer, mutely witnessing that nothing can be done and no- 
thing changed, and that he comes simply to give himself up. 
Whether the gesture is one of dedication or of worship, we can still 
say that the feeling behind it is the realisation of the Holy, and that 
awe, love and fear all enter into it simultaneously. Notice that there 
is no question here of a passive state; to assert that would be to 
imply that the activity of the technician, as he takes, modifies or 
elaborates, is the only activity worthy of the name. 

We must, of course, recognise that we are in a state of utter 
confusion today about this point and many others. It is almost im- 
possible for us to avoid a picture of activity which would be in 
some sense physical. We can hardly help seeing it as the starting-up 

190 



of a machine, a machine of which our bodies are the spring and 
perhaps also the model. We have completely lost sight of the classi- 
cal idea, taken up and enriched by the Fathers of the Church, that 
contemplation is the highest form of activity: and it might be worth 
while to ask ourselves why. The moralistic point of view in all its 
forms, with its belief in the almost exclusive value of works, seems 
to be very largely responsible for discrediting the contemplative 
virtues. Kantianism still more, by bringing in constructive activity 
as the formal principle of knowledge, has had the same disastrous 
tendency; it refuses all positive reality to the contemplative virtues, 
were it only by the fatal separation which it made for the first time 
between theoretical and practical reason. I admit, of course, that no 
true contemplation can be practised except from within a realist 
metaphysical system and will not here go into the nature of the 
realism in question, which is not, of course, necessarily the same as 
St. Thomas's. 

There is no reason, then, to deny that worship can be an act: but 
this act is not simple apprehension. It is in fact extremely difficult 
to define, particularly the aspect which is not mere apprehension. 
We might say that it was the act of simultaneously throwing one's- 
self open and offering one's-self up. They would grant us that as a 
psychological description: but opening to what? offering to what? 
Modern subjectivism is at once up in arms, and we are back at the 
first formulation. But I think it is beyond dispute that if pure 
subjectivism ought really to be considered as a standpoint attained 
once for all by the modern mind, then the religious question would 
indeed have to be regarded as obsolete. One contemporary example 
is of particular use here. It is quite obvious that religion is impossible 
in such a universe as Proust's; and if, here and there, we come across 
something which belongs to the religious category, this just means 
that cracks have appeared in the structure of Proust's universe. 

But I think that this subjectivism cannot be for one moment 

191 



regarded as an established position. I have only time to indicate the 
general directions of my reasons for thinking this, and will not go 
into details today. My own position on this point agrees almost 
completely with that of M. Jacques Maritain, and has common 
ground also with the German theories of intentionality held by 
contemporary phenomenologists. I believe that Descartes and his 
disciples only opposed realism because they had a partly materialist 
nodon of it. 'Despite their claim to treat of sense and intelligence/ 
says Maritain, 'Descartes and Kant never came beyond the thres- 
hold, because they spoke of them in the same way as they did of 
other things, and had no knowledge of the realm of mind.' I should 
like to add a parallel observation: they made illegitimate borrow- 
ings from optics in their epistomology, with effects that can hardly 
be exaggerated. Here is another example of science made the start- 
ing-point for the effacement of spiritual reality. 

I think, then, that it is only by leaning on unfounded postulates 
of this sort that one is led to treat worship, for example, as a mere 
attitude having no link with any reality whatever. But if we go 
behind them, if that is, we climb resolutely up the hill down which 
modern philosophy has been slipping for more than two centuries, 
then I believe it is possible for us to recover the basic idea of sacred 
knowledge: and this alone can restore its reality to contemplation. 

I am a little ashamed to offer you superficial and hasty outlines of 
such very complicated and important ideas. But I cannot hope to 
do more than reconnoitre such an enormous territory. As Peter 
Wust, the German metaphysician, writes: 'If we consider the 
evolution of the theory of knowledge from Pkto and St. Augus- 
tine, through the Middle Ages, and up to the present time, we feel 
that we are witnessing a more and more successful process of 
secularisation being applied to that holy part of the human mind 
which can only be called the intimum mentis. 9 He goes on to say that 
we moderns have to proceed by way of a metaphysic of knowledge 

192 



to the slow and painful recovery of something which was given in 
the Middle Ages through a mysticism veiled in mystery and awe. 
I think we could put this more simply by saying that we may have 
lost touch with the fundamental truth that knowledge implies 
previous askesis purification, in fact and that when all is said 
and done, knowledge in its fulness is not vouchsafed except where 
it has first been deserved. And here once more I think that the 
progress of applied science, and the habit of considering knowledge 
itself as a technical operation which leaves the knower wholly un- 
affected, has powerfully militated against a clear view of these 
matters. The askesis or purification must chiefly lie, it is clear, in 
progressively detaching ourselves from speculative thought in so far 
as it is purely critical and simply the faculty of making objections. 
'Truth is perhaps wretched/ said Renan, and Claudel was angry 
with the phrase because it sums up with terse cynicism what I 
should like to call the Philosophy of the But. When Barres in his 
Notebooks speaks of 'the mournful melancholy of Truth', he is 
speaking from the heart of this philosophy. It is the root of every 
kind of pessimism; and sacred knowledge (as I called it) is its flat 
negation. A negation which is not always a starting-point, but 
perhaps more often, and certainly in Claudel's own case, the fruit 
of a heroic struggle. 

Here again, I think, we touch on one of the most sensitive points 
of our subject call it a nerve-centre, if you will. For most people, 
to say that the religious question is obsolete is the same as to say that 
the incurable imperfection of the world is now an established truth. 
And here we cannot overestimate the practical importance of the 
kind of negative apologetics which atheists habitually use: they 
seize every chance to show that the universe falls below our 
demands and can never satisfy them, and that the metaphysical 
expectation which we feel within us, whether it be inheritance or 
survival, can never be fulfilled by things as they are. 

N 193 M.B.H. 



But and this is surprising their insistence on the imperfection 
of the world goes hand in hand with a complete inability to think 
of evil as evil, or sin as sin. Here again we see the technical approach 
at work. The world is treated as a machine whose functioning 
leaves much to be desired. Man is luckily at hand to correct some of 
the faults; but for the moment, unfortunately, the whole is not in his 
control. It should be added that these faults or defects of working 
are nobody's fault: for there is nobody there to blame. Only man is 
somebody: otherwise there is simply an impersonal mechanism. And 
even Man is quite prepared to treat himself like the rest, by the 
process of inversion or internalisation of which I spoke above; to 
sink himself into this depersonalised cosmos. He is quite prepared 
to see in himself certain defects of working, which must be curable 
by taking various measures, and applying various kinds of indivi- 
dual or social therapeutic action. 

This presents us with a most illuminating connection: the relation 
between worship on the one hand and consciousness of sin on the 
other; for sin cannot be dealt with by any form of science, but only 
by the supernatural action of grace. May I draw your attention to 
the fact that the relation implied in science is here reversed? For not 
only does the reality involved in worship elude all possible control 
by the human subject, but also the subject seems, inversely, to pass 
under the control of an incomprehensible choice emanating from 
the mysterious depths of Being. 

This body of facts can alone give meaning to the notion of salva- 
tion. Salvation is quite meaningless in an intellectual climate 
dominated by the belief in a natural order which it is the business of 
science to restore, wherever it is found to have been accidentally 
upset. 

The idea of an order or natural course of life, to be re-established 
if necessary by suitable means, brings us to the third and perhaps 
the most central battlefield of the debate. Here the basic idea is 

194 



neither the progress of enlightenment nor the advancement of tech- 
nical science, but the march of Life itself, taken, not as a value, but 
as a source of values or a basis for evaluation. 

A little while ago I heard of a characteristic remark made by one 
of the people most at the centre of international social work. 'I 
don't object to mysteries on principle/ he said, 'in fact there may be 
mysteries for all I know. But I can't feel any personal interest in, for 
instance, the doctrine of the Trinity. I don't see what it has to do 
with me or what use it can be to me.' Now this seems to me a most 
significant attitude. The worthy man could have become passion- 
ately interested in a discussion of fiscal justice, or the principles of 
social security, for he would have recognised its 'vital* character: 
but he thinks the Trinity is merely a subject for idle speculation. 
The word Vital', taken in its literal sense, is what should occupy us 
here. Notice that there is a very obvious connection between the idea 
of life (or the primacy of the Vital) and my earlier remarks about 
the spirit of applied science. For the mastery of objects is still, after 
all, relative to life considered as something of intrinsic value, some- 
thing which is its own justification. I will not harp on the origin of 
this idea, and will merely remind you that Nietzsche gave the 
completest expression to it. In Nietzsche the idea of life slides into 
the will to power, an idea which at first glance may appear more 
precise. But in other writers the idea retains its rich vagueness (and 
therefore, it must be added, its basic ambiguity). The single point 
I want to stress is this. To many minds it is life which is the unique 
criterion or beacon of all values (and some of these who so believe 
think themselves Christians; here indeed is food for thought!). For 
instance, take the elementary distinction between right and wrong. 
In their eyes, an action will be right if it tells in favour of life, 
wrong if it tells against it. 

Notice at once that from this point of view life is something on 
which we neither need nor can pass judgment. Questions about the 

195 



value of life are no longer in order, for life is itself the principle of all 
value. But here an ambiguity at once arises before us, presenting us 
with inextricable difficulties. What life are we talking about? 
Mine? Yours? Or life in general? 

First of all, it is clear that this doctrine, which seems to have no 
rational basis, can only be justified by being immediately self- 
evident. But to what is the self-evidence attached if not to my own 
feelings about my own life, and the special sort of warmth I feel 
radiating from it? Is it not linked up with the irreducible datum of 
my own self-love? 

Unfortunately it is also perfectly clear that the people who claim 
to use Life as their criterion of values, especially where conflicts 
arise, are by no means referring to my life qua mine, but to life in 
general. For instance, a Swiss schoolmaster friend of mine who 
believes in the primacy of Life (though he would not interpret it in 
the least like Nietzsche) will be at pains to point out to his pupils 
that the practice of chastity, or, in a very different sphere, the 
practice of co-operation, is bound up with Life itself, and that if 
we flout these great duties we are flouting Life, etc. Two points are 
immediately apparent here. First, my friend has begun by defining 
Life in a tendentious way so that it is coloured by certain spiritual 
needs in himself, though he has no direct awareness of them. 
Secondly, if we take life generally, yet vaguely in the mass, we 
cannot draw from it the same doctrine as we can from the immedi- 
ate though restricted intuition felt exclusively about my life in direct 
experience. 

A philosophy of Life is therefore destined by its own nature to be 
ambiguous. It either simply claims to translate certain biological 
truths into general terms; in which case, the field of such truths 
being enormous, it might be used to justify contradictory theories. 
(I need not remind you, perhaps, of the extraordinary actions which 
one of our most notorious contemporary writers claims to justify by 

196 



parallels in the animal kingdom.) Or else it will make a bold but 
unjustifiable projection, and, ceasing to consider life as a pheno- 
menon or group of phenomena which are biologically observable, 
will see instead a kind of spiritual force or current; in which case it 
will at once lose its experimental status. I think, for my own part 
that there is something unprincipled in this attempt to eat one's cake 
and have it too; here is a doctrine which presents as the expression 
of empirical data what is really only a free choice of the mind. 

The more concrete our examples, the more hopeless the confusion 
we find. 

If any axiom is implied in the scattered and unformulated philo- 
sophy which colours or underlies present-day literature, it seems to 
be this: 'I am the same as my life. I am my life. To say that my life 
will one day be spent means that on that day I myself shall be 
entirely spent/ The writers suppose that only a body of fictions, 
which should be regarded as pure survivals, stand between me and 
this fundamental identity. Do not let us ask how this error or mis- 
take is metaphysically possible, for that enquiry would take us too 
far out of our way. The claim they are making is that life somehow 
secretes spiritual poisons which may block its stream at any moment, 
and that it is the task of consciousness to dissolve these poisons and 
flow, as far as it can, with the stream it has thus cleared. 

Now these are certainly metaphors, and I am sure they originate 
in the philosophy of applied science of which I spoke just now. 
That is not important here. The important thing to see here is 
where we shall be led by so understanding the relation between 
ourselves and our lives or (to put it more accurately) by holding this 
view of intellectual honesty. I think that we here touch upon the 
most serious problem raised by the literature of the last few years, 
and especially by M. Gide. I can only approach it from one 
direction. 

It should be noted that this concern for perfect sincerity corre- 

197 



spends incontestably and explicitly with the desire for freedom. I 
refer you to such books as Les Nourrituw Ternstres an extra- 
ordinarily significant piece of evidence. But what is the price of 
freedom? Nothing less than a complete renunciation of all claims 
to master my life. For mastering my life is in effect subordinating it 
to some principle. Even supposing that this principle is not a pas- 
sively acquired heritage, it will still represent a phase of my past in 
fossilised form. This phase of my past has no right to govern my 
present. But if I am to shake off the yoke of the past, there is only 
one way of doing it by giving myself over to the moment and 
forbidding myself any form of commitment, any kind of vow. 
Surely you will agree with me that this liberty, in the cause of 
which I am putting constant constraint on myself, has nothing in 
it, no content; in fact it is the refusal of all content whatsoever. I am 
well aware that M. Gide not the Gide of today, the rationalist 
who is perhaps rather like Voltaire, but the Gide of Ley Nourritum 
Temstres will praise the fulness of the unclouded instant, savoured 
in all its novelty. But it is all too clear that dialectic has the last word 
here: it teaches us that novelty cannot be savoured except by the un- 
conscious reference to a past with which it is contrasted; and that, 
strangely enough, there is a satiety of novelty; one can be weary of 
the succession of one new thing after another for the very reason that 
they are all new. 

And this brings us within sight of another fact, too important to 
pass over, though it is difficult to speak of it without smacking of 
the stale old sermons you have so often heard before. But our 
recent experiences have brought the old truths into terrible relief- 
would it were not so! the truth that nothing comes nearer to 
despair, the rejection of being and suicide, than a certain way of 
extolling Life as the pure present moment. There is obviously no 
need for us to declare, like that young and impetuous Catholic 
apologist, M. Jean Maxence, that 'Kant calls to Gide, and Gide to 

198 



Andre Breton, and Breton leads Jacques Vache to suicide.' 1 That 
really is rather too sweeping a way of describing the genealogies of 
thought: indeed, in passing from Kant to Gide, M. Maxence is 
making out a case which cannot be upheld. I do not think that 
despair is the necessary outcome of Gide's doctrine of the moment; 
but only because the soul does not lack resources and sometimes has 
defences of which it is itself unaware. The story of M. Gide and his 
works proves this well enough. In my opinion, this doctrine of the 
Instant is not only a limiting position, but also a literary position 
carrying with it literary advantages; and on the whole it is recog- 
nised as such, at least implicitly. A man who really lived by it 
would be destined, is destined, and will bfc destined to the worst of 
spiritual catastrophes. 

I will draw a single conclusion from these observations. We can 
find no salvation for mind or soul unless we see the difference 
between ovij^r^^nd o^it life. The distinction may be in some 
ways a mysterious one, but the mystery itself is a source of light. To 
say 'my being is not identical with my life* is to say two different 
things. First, that since I am not my life, my life must have been 
given to me; in a sense unfathomable to man, I am previous to it; 
I am comes before I live. Second, my being is something which is in 
jeopardy from the moment my life begins, and must be saved; my 
being is a stake, and therein perhaps lies the whole meaning of life. 
And from this second point of view, I am not before but beyond my 
life. This is the only possible way to explain the ordeal of human 
life (and if it is not an ordeal, I do not see what else it can be). And 
here again, I hope very much that these words will not stir up in 
our minds memories of stereotyped phrases drowsily heard in the 
torpor too often induced by a Sunday sermon. When Keats 
certainly not a Christian in the strict meaning of the word spoke 
of the world as a Vale of soul-making*, and declared in the same 
1 Positions, p. 218. 
199 



letter of April 28th, 1819 (p. 256 Colvin's edition) that 'as various 
as the Lives of Men are so various become their souls, and thus 
does God make individual beings, Souls, Identical Souls, of the 
sparks of his own essence', he had the same idea as mine, though 
in his inimitable style it takes on far greater splendour and freshness. 
This brings me to my last point. 

I realise perfectly that the words 'grace* and 'salvation* give some 
of you a heartbreaking feeling of staleness. There is nothing new in 
them for voice or vision. The air around them has been breathed so 
long that it has become stifling. Now this is at the bottom of all 
the surrealist experiments of the day this need to escape to some- 
thing completely unknown. They contain nothing, I believe, that is 
not partially justifiable, so long as we turn away our eyes from the 
self-hatred and devilish perversion so often cloaked by the desire for 
novelty. 

But two observations are necessary here. Grace and salvation are 
no doubt commonplaces, like their peers, birth, love and death. 
They can none of them be tricked out anew, for they are all unique. 
The first time a man falls in love, or knows that he is to be a father 
or to die, he cannot feel he is hearing stale news. He would more 
likely feel that it was the first time anyone had ever loved or had a 
child or prepared for death. It is the same with genuine religious 
life. Sin, grace and salvation, as words, may be old stuff; as facts 
they are not, since they lie at the very heart of our destiny. 

But that is not my only answer. There is another yet. I believe 
most deeply that in the sphere of religion, too, the need for renewal 
is legitimate up to a point; that is, as far as it concerns forms of 
expression. And on this note I would end my lecture. I am sure 
that the reputation enjoyed by some modern schools of thought, 
and the human reverence commanded by or corresponding to this 
reputation, has been shown to have a destructive effect on spiritual 
development. But I believe that there is also a danger in thinking 

200 



that philosophico-theological ideas such as we find in St. Thomas 
Aquinas, for instance (not doctrine, for that is another story), are 
suitable for everybody in our day, just as they stand. I am inclined 
to say that they are suited to some minds but not to all; and that the 
profoundly true intuitions expressed in the Thomist formulae 
would gain greatly in force and intelligibility if they could be pre- 
sented in fresh terms; in words that were newer, simpler, more 
moving, and more closely in tune with our own experience and (if 
you will forgive the word) our own ordeal. But this presupposes a 
refashioning which would only be possible after an immense 
preliminary work of criticism and reconstruction. Toc^y we are 
nearly buried under the rubble. Till the rubble has been cleared 
away it is hopeless to think of building. It is a thankless task, appal- 
lingly thankless, yet I think that it must be done; only thus can 
religious life recover its soaring power. It is needed by the already 
convinced Christians, who would otherwise sink into the lethargy 
of devitalised doctrine. It is needed still more by those who are as 
yet unbelievers; who are feeling their way and surely longing to 
believe, and end their agonising struggle, if they would only admit 
it; who fear that they may be yielding to temptation if they surrender 
to the mounting faith and hope they feel in their hearts. It is sheer 
madness to call this speculative labour a mere luxury. It is, I repeat, 
a necessity, demanded not only by reason but also by charity. I 
think that those who say (in perfect good faith) that Christianity is 
first and above all a social matter, a doctrine of mutual help, a sort 
of sublimated philanthropy, are making a grievous and dangerous 
mistake. Their use of the word 'Life* is (as we have seen before) 
charged with ambiguity. I think that the man who says 'It doesn't 
matter what you think so long as you lead a Christian life* is com- 
mitting the worst of offences against Him who said 'I am the Way, 
the Truth, and the Life*. The Truth. It is on the ground of Truth 
that we should fight our first battle for religion; on this field only 

201 



can it be won or lost. In the issue of that fight, man will show 
whether he has indeed betrayed his mission and his destiny; we 
shall see, then, whether or no loyalty must remain the standard of a 
little chosen band of saints, advancing to their certain martyrdom, 
and indefatigably praying as they go for those who have chosen the 
shadows. 



202 



II 

SOME THOUGHTS ON FAITH 1 

I wish to make one thing clear from the start: not the point of 
view from which I hope to treat the subject you can gather 
that for yourselves but the personal attitude I intend to take 
up, and the kind of support I hope to obtain from my hearers. 

In point of fact, it is not my desire to speak to you simply as a 
Catholic, but rather as a Christian philosopher. Let me put it like 
this. It so happens that I have come to the Christian faith late in 
life, and after a winding and intricate journey. This journey I do 
not regret, for many reasons and especially because I can still recall 
it vividly enough to feel a particular sympathy with those who are 
yet on the road, following out, often with great difficulty, tracks 
resembling those which I stumbled along in my time. 

This metaphor cannot be avoided; but of course it is clumsy and 
in some ways even scandalous. I can in no sense boast of having 
arrived. I am convinced that I see more clearly than I did, though 
'convinced* is a word at once too weak and too intellectual. That is 
all. Perhaps it would be better to say this; the freer and more 
detached parts of me have struggled up into the light, but there is 
still much of me that lies in shadow, untouched by the almost level 
rays of the dawning sun: much of me is still, as Claudel would put 
it, uncvangelised. This part of me can still have a fellow-feeling for 
groping souls, travellers and seekers. But even this view is superfi- 
cial. For I believe that no man, however enlightened and holy he is, 
can ever really arrive until the others, all the others, have started out 

1 Lecture addressed to the Federation des tudiants Chrtticns, February 
28th, 1934- 

203 



to follow him. That is a great truth, and applies to philosophy as 
well as to religion, though philosophers have on the whole neglected 
it, for reasons which I will not go into at present. 

I can now explain the general direction of the task I have set my- 
self today. I want to make it my business to reflect before those who 
follow in my footsteps, and so perhaps to stretch out a helping hand 
to them as they climb the dark hill of Destiny, our common fate. 
We never climb alone, though we often seem to do so; belief in 
loneliness is the first illusion to dispel, the first obstacle to overcome; 
in some cases the first temptation to conquer. There is no need for 
me to say that I chiefly address myself to the less fortunate among 
you; to those who despair of ever reaching the summit of the moun- 
tain, or (what is worse) are persuaded that there is no summit and 
no ascent, and that the adventure of Life is reduced to tramping 
miserably about in the mists; the process will go on till death, when 
total extinction will devour or dedicate its incomprehensible 
vacuity. 

First, then, I will put myself in the place of those wandering 
travellers who have ceased to believe even in a goal to be attained 
I mean a metaphysical goal, not a social one and who have 
ceased to attach any meaning to the word 'destiny'. 

These wanderers are legion, and we must not deceive ourselves 
with the belief that they can be rallied by explanation or encourage- 
ment; yet I think there is one sort of meditation which has a rousing 
force. I think there is something which has greater power than art 
or poetry in the tragic state of the world's struggle today. A con- 
crete metaphysic, in tune with the deepest notes of our personal 
experience, may have a decisive part to play for many souls. In the 
short time allowed to me, I will try to indicate some roads that a 
few people may not disdain to follow. 



204 



THE UNBELIEVER S IDEA OF FAITH 

I want to attempt to draw out the more or less implicit idea of 
faith formed in the minds of those who honestly believe as a cer- 
tainty that they do not possess it. For the sake of analysis, I think we 
shall have to distinguish several cases to which unbelief as we know 
it can always be more or less accurately reduced. I shall purposely 
neglect the case (which is anyhow very rare) of those who reply to 
our questions, 'To me the word faith is meaningless; I do not even 
understand what it could denote/ The man I am thinking of 
would be bound, if we pressed him, to adopt one of the following 
positions: 

(1) Either he would join the ranks of those who think that faith 
is simply a weakness and a form of credulity, and congratulate 
themselves on being free of it. 

(2) Or else, far from deriding it, he will say that faith is a boon to 
its possessor, but that this boon is denied to himself. The second case 
is ambiguous and must be further subdivided into three possibilities: 

(a) He may mean 'Faith is admittedly a convenient deception, 
but unfortunately it does not deceive me*. In this case he is really 
preening himself on a sort of superiority, which is balanced by the 
admission of the painful price exacted by it. But fundamentally he 
despises what he seems or pretends to envy, so he is in the same case 
as the unbeliever who regards faith as a mere weakness. 

() Faith may also be regarded as a pleasant idiosyncrasy, rather 
like a feeling for music. But this second alternative is itself ambigu- 
ous. For the man of faith is in fact making assertions about reality, 
which the music-lover, of course, is not. Are these assertions valid? 
The unbeliever whose case we are at present considering would no 
doubt say 'Yes, they are valid for the man who makes them*. But 
this is equivalent to saying that they are false, for the man who makes 
these assertions claims that they are for everybody and not only for 
himself. 

205 



(c) Last of all comes the case, more frequent than most people 
imagine, of the unbeliever who regards faith as a real communion 
with a higher reality for the man who has it, but confesses that this 
reality is unfortunately not revealed to him. In this case, the un- 
believer speaks of faith almost as a blind man speaks of sight. 

I find it particularly easy to describe the last case, since for many 
years it was my own. I even wrote that I believed in the faith of 
others although I had none myself. But I have realised since then 
that this was a contradictory attitude, and that it was anyhow a deep 
delusion to think that I could really believe in the faith of others if 
I had none of my own. The fact is that when we have already come 
as far as this, we are in an open and expectant state of mind which 
either implies faith or is faith. At any rate, I wrote during the same 
period, 'I do not truly know whether I have faith or not: I do not 
know what I believe/ 

And so today I am inclined to think that the state expressed by 
this confession of uncertainty is really, though not consciously, the 
state of the man who thinks he can roundly declare himself to be 
without faith. 

FAITH A FORM OF CREDULITY 

Now let us return to the first two cases I described, and particu- 
larly to the idea that faith is a form of credulity. Does it and can it 
correspond to the believer's idea of his faith or to his experience of it? 

We at once meet with a difficulty, a paradox. Faith is a virtue: 
can this be squared with interpreting faith as credulity? 

At first sight we should say 'Certainly not*. Virtue is a power, 
but credulity is a weakness, a relaxation of judgment. It seems then 
that the believer and the unbeliever are using the same word for two 
unrelated things. I foresee that the unbeliever will reply something 
like this: 'The believer holds that faith is a virtue because it implies 
a kind of humility. But to us, it is just this humility which seems so 

206 



despicable, for it touches a part of our nature that we think it is 
wrong to humiliate, namely our judgment. And whence comes 
this need of humbling the judgment? From radical cowardice. Life 
in the world presents us with a terrible picture. Yes, but the truly 
wise man, whose wisdom is also heroism, is not afraid to look the 
world in the face. He knows that, outside himself and his own 
reason, he has no hope of finding any refuge from the misrule which 
governs the world. The believer, on the other hand, fancies that 
there is an ultimate refuge beyond the world, in which he puts his 
trust apd to which he makes his prayer. He fancies that the God he 
invokes is pleased by his worship; and so he comes to treat as a 
virtue what we unbelievers know very well to be nothing better 
than escapism and voluntary blindness/ 

FAITH AN ESCAPE 

This is the centre of the problem. We have, I think, managed to 
grasp the idea of faith as it is held by the unbeliever when the un- 
belief is absolute and takes the form of rejection, almost of disgust. 
But we are bound to ask ourselves about the position to which such 
a judgment refers. 

Observe in the first place that the interpretation of faith as escape 
is a pure construction, and in many cases does not correspond with 
the facts. For instance, I can assure you from my own experience 
that my faith was born at a time when I was in an exceptional state 
of moral stability and personal happiness. Otherwise I might have 
been suspicious of it. To what does this invention of the unbeliever 
correspond? 

We might do well here to consider the penetrating remarks made 
by Scheler in his book Resentful Man. The unbeliever, he said, takes 
it for granted that all true values must be universal, and such that 
they are admitted by everyone. He says that something which can 
be neither demonstrated nor communicated, and which does not 

207 



force itself irresistibly upon all reasonable creatures, whoever they 
may be, has no more than a purely subjective significance and may 
therefore be legitimately set aside. But what is the reason for this 
concern for widespread universality? Why this appeal to the judg- 
ment of the first comer, whoever he may be? Scheler inclines to the 
view that it is due to a grudge so deep-seated that it is unconscious; 
the grudge felt all too often by the have-nots towards the haves. What- 
ever he may say, whatever interpretation he strives to put on this 
destitution which he wants to call emancipation, it must be ad- 
mitted that, now and then, the unbeliever will see himself as a have- 
not and the believer as a have. 

UNBELIEF BASICALLY EMOTIONAL 

There is, then, an emotional element lurking beneath the appar- 
ently objective and rational assertion or claim made by the un- 
believer; and what is more, deeper thought on the matter will show 
us that it could not be otherwise. 

Let us examine once more the assertion of the militant unbeliever. 
It comes down to this. 'I know there is nothing there: if you try to 
persuade yourself to the contrary, it is just because you are too 
cowardly to face this terrible truth/ I know there is nothing there. Try 
to take in the monstrosity of that assertion. It is offered, or at least 
should normally be offered, as the conclusion of infinite research. In 
fact, such research is impossible. Our position in the universe does 
not allow us even to begin it. So weak is our position that we cannot 
even value the life of one of our fellow-men and judge whether it 
repays his trouble in living it. So if the pessimists seem to be report- 
ing the results of a research, they are just deceiving us. It is an un- 
conscious imposture. 'Pessimism', I wrote at the time when I was 
unsure whether I believed or not, 'can only be a philosophy of dis- 
appointment. It is a purely polemical doctrine, and the pessimist 
who holds it is making an attack upon himself or upon an opponent 

208 



outside himself. It is the philosophy of "Do you? Well, I don't"/ 
The unbeliever, then, who is really the same as the absolute pessi- 
mist, must not be held up as the defender of objective truth. There 
is in fact no attitude more subjective, and more insidiously subjec- 
tive, than his own. 

SCEPTICISM 

But are we not therefore driven into a kind of despairing scepti- 
cism? Are we not forced to say simply that certain persons have the 
faculty of belief, as a given body has a given property, and that 
others have not? that this faculty may indeed be enviable, but that, 
after all, this leads us nowhere and brings us to no conclusion, and 
that we cannot know whether the delusion lies with the believers or 
the unbelievers? 

This position seems to be quite untenable, and I should like to 
say clearly why. 

What does this scepticism really imply? 

It finally comes down to saying to the believer, 'Perhaps you can 
see something that I can't, but the mistake may just as well be on 
your side. No judgment between us is possible. All the same, 
perhaps you suppose that you can see someone who is not really 
there." 

THE CONTRADICTIONS OF SCEPTICISM 

The whole question here is whether, in voicing this doubt, one 
is not unconsciously substituting, for the reality of faith, an entirely 
imaginary notion which is not in the least like the deep and un- 
deniable experience of the believer. 

When I say to my man, 'You thought you saw someone, but I 
think you were mistaken and that there was no one there,* we are 
both of us on the level of objective experiment, and this implies by 
definition that there are points of reference, verifications, and an 

o 209 M.B.H. 



impersonal (or rather depersonalised) check. My assertion can only 
make sense if there are means of ascertaining that the other man's 
belief did not correspond with reality, i.e. if an observer X, assumed 
to be normal and endowed with a normal sensory apparatus and a 
sane judgment, could be put in our place and arbitrate between us. 
But it is easy to see that such a substitution is quite inconceivable 
here, and that we cannot even imagine its being made. 

If we think about it, indeed, we shall see that the substitution can 
only be made on a level, or on a spiritual plane, where our individu- 
ality is specialised, and momentarily reduced, for certain practical 
purposes, to a partial or partialised expression of itself. For instance, 
I can very well say to someone whose sight is better than mine, 
'Come and stand here and tell me if you see so-and-so/ Or to 
someone with a more subtle sense of taste, 'Come and taste this and 
tell me what you think of it.' Even in more complex cases, which 
nevertheless only employ some elements of the personality (normalis- 
able elements we might call them), I could say to somebody else, 
'Put yourself in my place what would you do?' But I can no 
longer do it in cases where the whole of a person is involved: no one 
can put himself in my place. And faith, when it is most real and most 
like itself (for we must of course not consider its degraded or mech- 
anical expressions here) is most sure to issue from the whole being 
of a man and to involve him. 

This is not all. We must notice that the object of faith is simply 
not manifested with the characteristics which distinguish any em- 
pirical person. It cannot figure in experience, since it entirely com- 
mands and transcends experience. If I am in some ways led to 
regard it as outside myself, it appears to my consciousness still more 
essentially as being within myself, more inward to me than I can be 
to myself, I who invoke or assert it. This means that the distinction 
between internal and external, and the categories of outside and 
inside, vanish as soon as faith comes on to the scene. An essential 

210 



point this,: though the psychology of religion by its very definition 
ignores it, since it equates faith with a simple state of the soul, a 
purely internal event. Much could profitably be drawn from this, 
but I cannot attempt it now. If I were forced to use a metaphor, I 
should say that the believer thinks of himself as within a reality 
which at once penetrates and enfolds him. 

From this new point of view the sceptic's attitude becomes 
meaningless. For if he says, 'Perhaps there is nobody there, where 
you think there is somebody/ he is appealing, either actually or by 
implication, to a corrective experience which by definition would 
leave outside itself the very thing which is in question: for the object 
of faith is assumed to transcend the conditions implied in all experi- 
ence. We must recognise, therefore, that as faith is revealed in its 
pure nature, it will triumph more and more over the sceptics, who 
can only question the value of faith because they begin with a picture 
of it which caricatures it. 

It might also be said that scepticism tends to treat belief and un- 
belief as attitudes which, although of course they are mutually ex- 
clusive, are nevertheless related to each other as two alternative 
suppositions; and thereby fails to appreciate their essential incom- 
mensurability. It is not enough to say that the believer's universe is 
not the same as the unbeliever's. We must understand that it over- 
flows it iti all directions and integrates it, just as the world of the 
seeing man overflows and integrates the world of the blind man. 

UNBELIEF A REFUSAL 

But there is something else no less important. As the soul 
approaches more nearly to faith, and becomes more conscious of the 
transcendence of her object, she perceives more and more clearly 
that she is utterly incapable of producing this faith, of spinning it of 
her own substance. For she knows herself, she realises more and 
more clearly her own weakness, impotence and instability; and thus 

211 



she is led to a discovery. This faith of hers can only be an adherence, 
or, more exactly, a response. Adherence to what? Response to 
what? It is hard to put into words. To an impalpable and silent 
invitation which fills her, or, to say it in another way, which puts 
pressure upon her without constraining her. The pressure is not 
irresistible: if it were, faith would no longer be faith. Faith is only 
possible to a free creature, that is, a creature who has been given the 
mysterious and awful power of withholding himself. 

And so the problem stated at the beginning of this lecture appears 
under a new guise. From the point of view of faith and of the 
believer, unbelief, at any rate when it is explicit, begins to look like 
a refusal, refusal moreover which can take on many different forms. 
I will merely observe here that very often, perhaps most often, it 
takes the form of inattention, of turning a deaf ear to the appeal 
made by an inner voice to all that is deepest in us. It should be 
noticed that modern life tends to encourage this inattention, indeed 
almost to enforce it, by the way it dehumanises man and cuts him 
off from his centre, reducing him to a collection of functions which 
have no power of intercommunication. We must add that where 
religious faith seems to survive in a man who is thus department- 
alised, it is apt to become debased and to look like mere routine to 
an outside observer. Unbelief will this time have a shred of justifica- 
tion, though here again it rests on nothing but a misunderstanding. 

This inattention or distraction is indeed a kind of sleep, from 
which we can each of us awake at any time. The inattentive man 
may be awakened just by meeting somebody who radiates genuine 
faith which, like a light, transfigures the creature in whom it 
dwells. I am one of those who attach an inestimable value to 
personal encounters. They are a spiritual fact of the highest impor- 
tance, though unrecognised by traditional philosophy, for reasons 
which are perfectly clear but irrelevant to our present discussion. 
The virtue of such encounters is to rouse the inattentive to a reflec- 

212 



tion or return upon themselves, to make them say 'Am I really sure 
that I don't believe'? This is enough: if the soul really asks herself 
this question in all sincerity, rejecting all angry prejudices and 
parrot imaginings, she will be brought to recognise, not indeed that 
she already believes, but that she is in no case to say that she does 
not believe. Or perhaps it would be truer to say that the assertion of 
unbelief, made just then, would almost inevitably be tainted with 
pride, and that completely honest and careful introspection could 
not fail to unmask this pride. 'I do not believe' ceases to look like 
'I cannot believe* in its own eyes, and tends to turn into 'I will not 
believe'. 

HAS HEROISM AN INTRINSIC VALUE? 

Fom this last point of view, the spiritual position of a man like 
Andre Malraux may be regarded as specially significant, one might 
almost say typical. His absolute pessimism about the world as it 
stands has, as its reverse side, the (no doubt originally Nietzschean) 
idea that what matters most is, not the wretchedness of man, but his 
greatness, not that he must do without succour and be resigned to 
doing without, but that he must not even desire it. To a Malraux, 
man has not grown to manhood or reached his full stature until he 
has taken full account of his own tragic position. In the eyes of the 
author of La Condition Humaine, this alone makes heroism possible. 
We stand here on the backbone of a steep ridge which keeps apart 
some of the most courageous minds of our generation. But we at once 
notice something that may well disturb us. What exactly does it 
mean to assign an intrinsic value to heroism? It seems plain to me 
that the value is here attached to a kind of ardour and to the entirely 
subjective feelings about it of the man who is striving to act heroic- 
ally. But there is no valid or objective reason why heroic ardour 
should be put higher on the list than any other sort, for instance, 
erotic ardour. You can only justify the hierarchy by bringing in an 

213 



entirely new scale of considerations, which have nothing to do with 
either heroism or ardour; for instance, social utilitarianism. But as 
soon as we get on to that ground, we contradict the Nietzschean 
idea from which we started. To a logical Nietzschean, social utility 
is an idol, one might almost say a low-grade idol. Of course I am 
perfectly prepared to admit that in a book like La Condition 
Humaine charity breaks out in two or three places; but it comes like 
a voice from another world. I think you can only link heroism and 
love together if you slur over the facts; they are irreducible except in 
a single case, the heroism of the martyr. I take that word in its 
strictest sense, witness. But in a philosophy which turns on refusal, 
there is no place for witness, since witness refers to a higher reality 
acknowledged in worship. 

THE DEBASEMENT OF THE WORD 'WITNESS* 

Like so many other important ideas, the notion of witness has 
become considerably debased. The first thing that occurs to us when 
we hear the word is the witness we may be called upon to give 
when we have been present at some event. And so we develop a 
tendency to think of ourselves as recording-machines, and to treat 
witness as the mere playing-over of the record. Hence we forget the 
really important point about witness; its attestation. That is the 
essential here. Yes, but what is attesting? Not simply establishing a 
fact; nor simply asserting. When I attest, I bind myself, but I do it 
of my own free will, since attestation given under the yoke of con- 
straint would be useless and would deny its own nature. In this 
sense it brings into being the closest and most mysterious union of 
necessity and liberty. There is no act more essentially human than 
this. At the root of it there is the recognition of a certain datum: but 
at the same time there is something else quite different. In attesting, 
I really proclaim, ipso facto, that I should be going back on myself, 
and yes even annulling myself, were I to deny this fact, this 

214 



reality of which I have been the witness. The denial, of course, may 
take place, as mistake, contradiction or betrayal, and it is a betrayal 
indeed. It is extremely important to show how degrees in attesta- 
tion are conceivable. Its spiritual value becomes more and more 
noticeable where it has to do with those invisible realities which do 
not beat upon us with the immediate, strident and irresistible 
obviousness of the objects of sense-experience. We see here a para- 
dox which cannot be too strongly insisted upon. The realities to 
which religious attestation refers are certainly transcendent: but 
from another point of view they look as if they really needed that 
humble and beggarly witness, the believer who attests them. There 
could surely be no better example of the incomprehensible, or 
perhaps rather supra-intelligible polarity which lies at the heart 
of faith. 

FAITH AND ATTESTATION 

Indeed, the closeness of the link between faith and attestation 
becomes fully apparent as soon as we touch upon the intermediary 
idea of fidelity. There cannot be faith without fidelity. Faith in itself 
is not a movement of the soul, a transport or ravishment: it is 
simply unceasing attestation. 

Yet here once more we must turn back to the unbelievers. They 
cannot resist interrupting us here with a question- always the same 
one, and we come up against it at every stage of the unending 
dispute 'What about the people who can only witness to the in- 
justice they have fallen prey to, the manifold suffering they have 
undergone, the abuses they have seen? How can they give their 
witness in favour of a higher reality?* Once more the stumbling- 
block is the problem of evil. I have already given a partial answer 
to this question, but I should like to point out also that the great; 
witnesses have certainly never been recruited from the fortunate of 
this world, but far more from the suffering and the persecuted. If 

215 



there is one single conclusion forced upon us by the spiritual history 
of mankind, it is that the growth of faith is hindered, not by mis- 
fortune, but by satisfaction. There is a close kinship between satisfac- 
tion and death. In all domains, but especially perhaps in the 
domain of the spirit, the man who is satisfied, and admits himself 
to have everything he needs, is already beginning to rot. Satisfaction 
is what so often gives birth to the taedium vitae, the secret disgust, 
which we may all have felt at times, one of the most subtle of all the 
forms of spiritual corruption. 

But of course this does not mean that a philosophy of attestation 
and faith need necessarily be a cult of moral pain. The quality 
which is furthest from satisfaction is not pain, but joy. The neo- 
pagan critics of Christianity have never had the least conception of 
this. They fail to see the close kinship which joins joy to faith and 
hope, and to the thankfulness of the witnessing soul who glorifies 
God. We must make a new use here of the distinction that M. 
Bergson so admirably drew between the Closed and the Open. 
Satisfaction is something that happens within doors, in a closed 
creature; but joy can only unfold beneath the open sky. It is radiant 
in its very nature; it is like the sun at noonday. But we must not let 
a spatial metaphor deceive us. The distinction between open and 
closed only takes on its full meaning when we are speaking of faith. 
Or, to go deeper still, when we are speaking of the free act of the 
soul, as she wills or refuses to acknowledge that higher principle 
which momently creates her and is the cause of her being, and as 
she makes herself penetrable or impenetrable to that transcendent 
yet inward action without which she is nothing. 



216 



Ill 

PETER WUST ON THE NATURE 
OF PIETY 

Peter Wust writes, 'We should assign the first beginnings of 
philosophy to the primitive emotion (Uraffect) called 
Astonishment/ 1 It is true to say that modern philosophy 
r rom its beginning tried to put methodical doubt in the place of 
istonishment, and saw in it a point a priori to all rational specula- 
ion. But this is simply a clear indication of the way in which 
r undamental metaphysical relations were already being overthrown 
it that period. Doubt is really no more than a second a priori of 
philosophical thought, if I may so phrase it; a phenomenon of re- 
iction, a kind of recoil, which can only take place when our deepest 
being has been somehow split by an ontological mistrust so deep- 
rooted as to be almost a habitus of the soul. Mistrust or trust towards 
Being; those, to Wust, are the two main directions which every 
mind inclined to speculation must choose between. Even this is not 
enough; the opposition is of wider importance. It does not only 
:oncern the metaphysician's solutions of the theoretical problem of 
reality, but the whole of culture considered in all its expressions. 2 

The human mind, since Descartes, has been familiar with the 
idea of a scientific philosophy (i.e. one without presuppositions). 
But this implies, for the same reasons, a monstrous (ungebeuerlich) 

1 Dialektik dcs Geistcs, p. 212. 

2 At first sight we might here be tempted to reply by reminding Wust 
jf the high place accorded by Descartes to Admiration in his theory of 
he passions. But did he ever think of it as a metaphysical starting-point? 
x, sail more, as what we might call a sensitive zone where Being 
icknowlcdged as such grips the creature whom ad mi radon stirs? It would 
;ecm rash to claim that he did. 

217 



upsetting of speculative balance. 1 'Scientific* philosophising is 
surely just setting one's-self the almost inhuman task of denying, 
absolutely and in the very depths of the soul, all pre-eminence and 
all positive hegemony of values. The philosopher has to say, at the 
very beginning of his enquiry, that he does not know whether 
there is such a thing as order or whether chaos is equally possible. 
He bears witness or rather is thought to do so that Yes and No 
are equally indifferent to him. In his eyes, this indifference is the 
sacred badge of the philosopher. 

But we should ask whether this indifference is genuine or even 
possible. Wust thinks that an analysis which went deeper than that 
of Descartes would show us that astonishment at ourselves is the 
basis of doubt. 

My doubt betrays my consciousness of my own contingent 
character and still more implicitly of the hidden gravitation of 
my own deepest being to a centre or an absolute middle point of being 
(not indeed apprehended but surmised) where the metaphysical 
insecurity of the creature may at last find rest. This insecurity and 
instability, contrasting so strangely with the everlasting repose and 
immutable order of Nature, is the central mystery, and the philo- 
sophy of Wust might be said to be an exhaustive inquiry into it. 
Nowhere else today, I think, could we find a more resolute attempt 
to define the metaphysical position of humanity; and to rekte it, on 
the one hand, to the order of Nature which it breaks through and 
transcends, and on the other hand to a supreme Reality which en- 
folds it on every side, though it never violates the relative indepen- 
dence that is the prerogative of the creature. For this Reality is itself 
free and freely sows the harvest of freedoms. 

Astonishment, as we see it, for example, in the eyes of a child, is 
the shaft of light which breaks through the enfolding clouds of our 
natural sleep, that sleep which holds under its sway whatever is 



218 



absolutely subject to the Law. Astonishment is the rising of 'the 
sun of the spirit blazing on the horizon of our being and filling us 
wholly with supra-vital delight, as its first rays gild and discover the 
exquisite panorama of creation and the eternal order that rules it*. 1 

How can we fail to see in this the inspiration running through 
the whole work of our own Claudel? Perhaps indeed it must direct 
all truly Catholic theories of knowledge. 

Wretched? How can I say without impiety 

That the truth of the things His highest hand has fashioned 

Is a wretched truth? Can I say without absurdity 

That a world which wears His likeness and works to His glory 

Is less than my self t and my most imagination 

Overtops it, andfnds in it nothing to lean on? 2 

Claudel has emphasised the i?/?/oi?, the impious pride, at the root 
of such doubt, and Wust himself never tires of denouncing it. 
Reviving the tradition of the great Doctors, so harshly broken by 
the 'scientific* philosophy engendered by the Cogito, he reminds us 
of the great truth which Jacques Maritain has stressed in our own 
time and country with such force: that knowledge is in itself a 
mystery. The great mistake of idealism perhaps lies in its initial 
assumption that the act of thinking is transparent to itself, whereas 
it is nothing of the kind. Knowledge is in fact unable to give an 
account of itself. When it tries to think itself, it is led irresistibly 
either to be content with metaphorical and material expressions 
which caricature it, or to treat itself as an absolute and self-sufficient 
datum, enjoying a priority to its object so startling that it becomes 
impossible to understand how it can be so entirely incapable, as far 
as one can sec, of creating that object in all its unimaginable rich- 
ness. 
But of course we can never be content just to say that knowledge 

1 Loc . tit., p. 206. 2 Lc Soulier de Satin, ist day, Scene VI. 

219 



is a mystery; we must add that it is a gift, perhaps, in a way, a grace; 
and that is Wust's claim when he attributes to it a 'naturally charis- 
matic* 1 quality; though this is gradually hidden from the conscious 
mind by the increasing secularisation of the knowing process. Once 
the secularisation is complete and it is going on everywhere in the 
modern world it must give rise to all the excesses of a self-intoxi- 
cated reason, cut off at once from belief and being, and bound to 
regard itself as an exploiting power whose actions are only censored 
by itself. And the world, too, in whose bosom this 'Promethean* 
power is at play, is stripped of all the attributes originally given to it 
by those unsophisticated minds for whom knowledge was not yet 
distinct from worship. 

It must be made absolutely clear that the philosophy of Wust is 
not to be construed as fideism. He explains himself on this point 
with perfect clarity in the Dialectic of the Spirit. 2 'The fideist*, he says, 
'is at the antipodes of the simple faith of the child; his faith is really 
the faith of despair.* 3 But of what does he despair, if not of his own 
poor human reason? and that because he began by presuming too 
much upon it. It would be no paradox to maintain that the fideist 
is a 'fallen Gnostic*. (The word 'gnostic', of course, is here used to 
describe those who put an absolute value on their needs or claims 
to know.) Wust, faithful to his love of dialectical oppositions and 
reconciliations (a heritage from Fichte, probably), also observes 
that the same 'Lucifer-like* point of consciousness closely unites the 
two attitudes, however opposed their indices may appear to a super- 
ficial consideration. 

But the genuine Christian keeps his distance from both pitfalls 
equally. When he witnesses to his trust in the universal Order, his 
witness should not be interpreted as mere surface optimism, but 

1 Naivitat and Pietat, p. 1 84. 2 Cf. especially pp. 620 ft seq. 

3 'The fideist', he says, 'makes a desperate leap into the eternal night of 
Godhead/ 

220 



recognised as the result of his reverence for the whole of Reality. It 
may easily seem irrational to us, at least to some extent, but nothing 
justifies our attributing existence in itself to this irrationality. 'The 
mind that throws itself upon Reality like a child knows that every 
personal creature is saved in so far as he surrenders without stint and 
without despair to the inner wooing of that Love whose voice he 
hears unceasingly in the depths of his soul/ 1 

I think it is impossible to exaggerate the importance of the part 
played in Wust's philosophy by this Platonic Idea of Childhood. 
It would obviously be absurd to set against it the alarming Tacts' of 
all the Freudian case-histories. However precociously the spirit of 
mistrust and cunning and perversity arises in the mind of a child, 
the Idea nevertheless has unbreakable validity. For it is a Witnessing 
Idea, one might almost say a Judging Idea; or better still, perhaps, 
an absolute a priori of human sensibility. One could quote the 
admirable passage where Wust is asking what it is that we find 
missing in the Stoic sage, and the sage as Spinoza, and even 
Schopenhauer conceives him, however near they come to sanctity. 
He replies that the lack in all of them is the lack of supreme and 
innocent delight in existence (Daseinsfreudi), of the idealism and 
optimism so opposed to the tragic outlook. Despite their greatness 
and heroic dignity, despite the serene smile that plays over their lips 
(and what indescribable subtlety it has, the smile of the Buddhist 
monks of Ling-Yang-Tsi!), they lack that final security in exis- 
tence, that armour of proof which guards the simple child, his 
serene trust and innocence. The sages renowned in history are still 
not innocent children in the strange and deep sense of the Gospel: 
'Verily, I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom 
of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein' (Mark x. 15). 
'This is the only possible way for the wise man to attain supreme 
wisdom; however deeply he has drunk at all the springs of human 

1 op. at., p. 622. 
221 



knowledge, however fully his spirit has supped of the bitter experi- 
ence of the world.' 1 

But someone may ask, is there any real reason why these sages, 
whether Buddhist or Stoic, should not recapture the soul of the 
child? One fact prevents them, according to Wust; they have 
broken away from the filial relationship with the Supreme Spirit, 
and this alone is what enables a man to have a child-like attitude 
towards the ultimate secret of things. This relationship is automa- 
tically destroyed by the triumph of naturalistic philosophy, which 
depersonalised the supreme principle of the universe: for to this 
view necessity can only appear as either fate or blind chance; and a 
man weighed down by such a burden is in no state ever to regain 
his vanished delight and absolute trust. He can no longer cling to 
the deep metaphysical optimism, wherein the primal simplicity of 
the creature in the morning of life joins the simplicity of the sage 
better here to call him the saint who, after journeying through 
experience, returns to the original point of the circle; the happy 
state of childhood which is almost the lost paradise of the human 
mind. 2 

Of course, we may ask whether this Paradise can indeed be 
regained; how can we imagine the recovery of a state which after all 
does seem related to non-experience as such? Wust's answer to this 
question is chiefly, as we have seen before, that there is an active 
principle of order and love (an It, an Es 9 over against the Me, the 
IcV) working continuously in the depth of our being. It is therefore 
a metaphysical impossibility for the Me ever completely to break its 
moorings and sever itself from its ontological roots. And therefore, 
if I have understood him rightly, a positive conversion remains 

1 Naivitat und Pictat, p. 1 10. 

2 Wust, of course, explicitly recognises the Fall as a fact (cf. Dial, des 
Geistes, p. 311, for an example), but it is far from incompatible with the 
deeper optimism here in question. 

222 



possible to the end. The self, renouncing the 'Promethean* pride 
whose only end is death, and avoiding also the opposite extreme of 
agnostical and desperate pessimism, at last makes confession of that 
docta ignorantia described by Nicolas of Cusa at the dawn of our age. 
Let me say once more that this is not the act of spiritual suicide 
encouraged by certain kinds of fideism, but the glad acceptance, 
made in a spirit of devout humility, of the limits set by supreme 
Wisdom to the manner of knowledge with which It has endowed 
the human mind. 

Perhaps this is a good place to observe that the theories of the Un- 
knowable which flourished in the West during the second half of 
the nineteenth century, and to which numbers of minds Tormed by 
contact with the positive sciences' still give their allegiance, are no 
better than beggarly caricatures of this wise doctrine, so accurately 
based upon man's middle state. Our neglect of it brought us to the 
perilous chances of an overweening metaphysic. Except for a 
narrow circle which has kept itself perpetually in touch with the 
eternal springs of knowledge and spirituality, the irreparable results 
of the ontological insolvency of Western thought have hardly begun 
to make themselves felt, continuing as they have for two and a half 
centuries, and that in spheres apparently quite remote from pure 
speculation. Peter Wust is certainly right to blame it upon a pride 
so inveterate that it can no longer be consciously felt. But I think 
that I should put more emphasis than he does on the way the 
'moderns' absolutely refuse a hearing to all attempts to establish any 
connection between being and value. There is no surer way to the 
very denial of reality as such. This 'devaluation' of being means 
turning it into a caput mortuum, a mere abstract residue. It is then the 
easiest thing in the world for the idealist critic to prove that it is a 
mere fiction of conceptual imagination, which a stroke of the pen 
will abolish without making the least difference to anything. 

This point of view enables us more fully to appreciate Peter 

223 



Wust's eminently reconstructive critique of the idea of piety. The 
idea is alive, and even worked out to an infinite degree, among all 
spiritually-minded men who have considered their own deepest 
experience. But contemporary philosophers, especially in France 
(with two or three exceptions), seem to think that the idea applies 
only to an 'attitude', and that the 'attitude* will at most only be 
interesting to 'behaviour* specialists. Wust, who owes much to 
Scheler on this as on many other points, saw very clearly that there 
is serious danger in treating piety as an attitude or state; far from 
this, we should see in it a real relation of the soul to its own spiritual 
context, and also of course to itself. This is the way to recover the 
sense of religion as a bond (ligameri), so fundamental and yet so 
frequently neglected. 

According to Wust, there is a close correspondence between 
simplicity and piety on the one hand as the habitus of the soul, and 
surprise and reverence on the other, as fundamental emotions or 
affections. The latter are related to the former much as the act is to 
the potency in Aristotle's metaphysic. This simply means that the 
soul's overwhelming sense of reverence before the harmony of the 
universe presupposes that such a soul has previously been attuned 
to this harmony. Wust recalls a passage in Goethe where he speaks 
of piety as 'original virtue' (Erbtugend) which therefore has its seat 
in a sphere unreachable by our immediate consciousness of our- 
selves. As Wust rightly observes, what he calls Naivitat (the French 
naivete is certainly not quite an accurate equivalent), differs from 
piety chiefly in the degree of its actualisation. Piety is the prolonga- 
tion and enrichment on the side of will of that spiritual candour 
which he, like many of his predecessors from Schiller onwards, 
calls by the name ofNaivitat. 

But even within piety we should distinguish complementary 
sides or rather aspects. In so far as piety is, properly speaking, a link, 
it re-enacts on a higher level that universal principle of cohesion 

224 



which governs nature and corresponds with what Ckudel calls the 
family-anty of all things with one another. But this very cohesion 
implies a certain self-affirmation in the terms it joins or draws to- 
gether; without this it is done away with, and disappears. This 
cohesion, then, does not only draw things together but also keeps 
them at their proper distances. We find the same characteristic on 
the higher level which we are considering now. 'There is one kind 
of piety which a person shows towards himself, where the factor of 
tistance appears with its essential characteristics. There is also a 
piety towards beings of the same nature as ourselves, with whom we 
cultivate spiritual relations/ 1 There is even a form of piety towards 
beings of an infra-human order. But piety reaches its highest point 
when it is given to the Creator Spirit (Urgcist\ since He is the 
absolute centre of all ties woven between particular beings. 

Wust very strongly emphasises the special importance to be 
attached to piety towards onc's-self. 'Piety towards one's-self is the 
great law of love,' he says, 2 'which we apprehend in the depths ol 
our nature, because each of us is this creature who has been given 
this shape and has occupied this place in the order of creation; the 
moment we have apprehended this law, it is incumbent upon us to 
assert it with all our might. And the bliss of our soul lies in never 
resisting that silent appeal which mounts up from the depths of our 
being/ 

I feel that here, once more, the philosopher of Cologne is stressing 
a profound truth doggedly ignored by the great majority of lay 
philosophers. He is really distinguishing, in the clearest possible 
manner, a love of selfperhaps mystical, certainly spiritual from 
the egoism which is just an extension of the will to live or the 
instinct of self-preservation. No doubt this instinct is presupposed 
by piety towards oncVsclf. But the specific object of piety is to 
protect the soul against the danger of pride inseparable from the act 
1 NaivitSt un4 Putat. p. 128. > Loc. at, p. 129. 

P 225 M.B.M. 



of its natural self-affirmation. 'Its particular aim', as he finely puts it, 
'is to maintain religious awe in the self towards the metaphysical 
deeps of its own reality, that mysterious reality with which God 
has endowed it. For our self is a holy temple of the Spirit, built by 
God's own hand, a wonderful inner universe with its own laws of 
gravity, still more marvellous than those we can see in the full 
vitality of the external universe with its infinity of mechanisms. It is 
a sanctuary, a Holy of Holies into which we may not enter, though 
it is ours, without a hidden and holy fear. We may not, I said. But 
also we cannot , in this Holy of Holies, enter the pkce of the altar 
with the eternal lamp of the most sacred mysteries burning before it. 
There is indeed a sense in which we are given to ourselves; and this 
is the meaning of our relative aseitas. But we are only entrusted to 
ourselves as works of art from the studio of an eternal Master. We 
are not our own masterpieces. That is why we are only left to our- 
selves as infinitely precious heirlooms, which we must treat as we 
would treat the treasure of our bliss.* 1 

These metaphors, at least when they are translated out of the 
German, may seem rather grandiloquent; but we must not be put 
off by this. The idea in itself, I think, is extremely important. It is 
only because they have lost sight of this idea that the lay philosophers 
can reproach a believer with the 'selfishness 9 , for instance, which 
they believe him to show by working for his own salvation. They 
do not see that the self-love enjoined by the Christian religion 
enjoined, not merely allowed is inseparable from the sense of close 
duality between what I am in my workaday life, and that hidden 
reality generally called the soul, which has been given to me, and of 
which I must give an account on the last day. Could we not say, 
in terms a little different from Wust's, that the non-Christian philo- 
sopher of today starts, perhaps sometimes unconsciously, from an 
assumption which may have dreadful consequences, namely, that 

l Loc.cit., pp. 132-133. 
226 



/ am the same as my life? He must then go on to say that the soul 
itself is only a more highly wrought expression of that hidden life, a 
sort of efflorescence, of which we cannot strictly say that it is given 
to me, since it is in fact myself. Once this fatal assumption is granted 
and its origins may easily be discovered in a certain type of biolo- 
gical philosophy prevalent in the nineteenth century it is clear that 
the love of self, or charity to the self, must be regarded simply as an 
extension of the life-instinct. 

But the assumption just cannot be allowed, I think, without 
ignoring some of the most urgent demands of genuine spiritual life 
all those demands described in Wust by the admirable but un- 
translatable word Distanzierung, which so well expresses the fact 
that I am not on an equal footing with myself, because what is 
deepest in me is not of me. 'Piety towards one's-self,' he says again, 
'surrounds the self like a delicate membrane, which must be kept 
safe from harm if we want to protect our souls from being laid open 
to great dangers/ 1 Such personal facts as restraint and tact are 
bound up with this need, and also a reverence for the self which 
may accompany the highest form of spiritual dignity. But between 
this feeling and the dangerous pride which springs from an ex- 
aggerated awareness of my personal independence, there is only a 
thin dividing line; we must realise that it is not easy to draw it. And 
yet the distinction holds, since reverence for one's-self is really con- 
cerned with Values which are, as it were, a heavenly trust within us 
which we are bound to defend whenever a hostile power threatens 
to profane them'. 

Wust, as we see, most explicitly repudiates the thesis that rever- 
ence for one's-self is defined as a sort of egocentric formalism, giving 
an absolute status to an out-and-out principle of freedom, divorced 
from all the spiritual contents in which it may be embodied. And it 
is in the name of these same values, of which it is in some sense the 
1 Nawitat und Pietat. p. 1 3 3- 
22? 



guardian and keeper, that the self is bound to resist the intrusions 
and encroachments of other personalities lacking in the sense of 
piety, lest they should work it harm. 

If this is so, then we must agree that the conceptions of contem- 
porary monadism miss an important truth. It is generally said today, 
without preliminary enquiry, that it is just a lack in us, a pure 
deficiency, which prevents us from being able to plunge into the 
spiritual being of another. Whereas in fact we should see that this 
inability is simply the price we pay for our spiritual dignity as free 
creatures. 'Our soul in its ultimate depths is a secret, and this is th* 
inner chamber of the soul which we are, up to a certain point, 
obliged to preserve religiously. Reverence for ourselves forbids us to 
unveil the sanctuary of our souls with a rash and impious hand, 
and to do so would be a real profanation and show an unforgivable 
lack of modesty/ 1 

This is perhaps the pkce to observe, more explicitly than even 
Wust himself, how much all naturalist interpretations of modesty 
are at fault, whether they are founded on a particular view of society 
or a view of life. A modesty which is entirely of the spirit, the 
modesty of the soul shown in such a passage as I have just quoted, 
can plainly only be justified by the notion of the individuality as its 
own treasure-house: it overflows all the categories which modern 
philosophy has taught us to use and be content with. Against this 
modesty, in fact, the most active and most opposite powers of our 
age have made alliance, and it is worth thinking for a moment 
about this surprising confederacy. 

Not only does a social imperative bid us share our spiritual riches 

so that everyone can make his own use of them here we see the 

completely material picture of invisible possessions now generally 

painted and a kind of diffuse philosophy tends to identify the 

spiritual and communicable: but also, rising from the other horizon, 

l Loc.cit.,p. 136. 

228 



a call to sincerity (of which the most striking phrases were certainly 
invented by Nietzsche) forbids us to allow any veils between our- 
selves and our 'souls', lest hypocrisy should grow up in their shade. 

We must recognise that there is a problem here, and I am not 
sure that Peter Wust sees how serious it is. The word soul, which 
I have just used, with such an anti-Nietzschean ring, only retains its 
fulness of meaning, it seems, when one's privacy of relation with 
himself has been safeguarded. I should like to describe it as linked, 
if not with notion, at least with the consciousness of a dialogue 
between the most active and critical Voices' of the orchestra within 
us and a ground-bass whose value would be changed and even lost 
if it ever quite touched them. We should lose and not gain by 
bringing in here the notion of the unconscious: the unconscious 
and even the subconscious are irrelevant in this context, and besides, 
we know the intellectual disasters following the rash use made of 
them by certain disciples of W. James. I am trying to make just 
two points here; first, that we can only speak of the soul where 
there is a sense of what might be called the scoring of the spiritual 
orchestra, and secondly, that sincerity in its most aggressive sense 
must necessarily oppose the very existence of the hierarchies assumed 
in such orchestration, since it must regard them as the results of 
prejudice or complacency, and say that they cannot stand up to "the 
light of truth'. The whole question is really whether this criticism 
does not presuppose the confusion of two spheres in fact irreducible 
to one another. Does not this process of spreading out the spiritual 
life to view deny its most specific character, the very inwardness that 
makes it what it is? just as the dissection and flattening out of a 
flower-head with all its organs side by side destroys the corolla and 
makes it no longer a flower? 

And yet we cannot deny that the difficulty is still a very serious 
one; for nothing can be put to more dangerous use than this idea of 
* personal hierarchy valid only for the individual, whose duty to 

229 



himself requires him to uphold it within him. I think myself that 
the solution can only be found by deepening our conceptions of 
transparency and purity. But here a preliminary distinction must be 
made. Men's minds have never before been so ready as they are now 
rashly to identify an exclusively formal process of cleaning-up 
which in all its forms can take place at the surface of the soul, since 
it has no interest in its structure or life with something quite differ- 
ent, a manner of being which conditions activity, and is to be per- 
ceived as immediately as we can perceive, for instance, the correct 
tuning of an instrument. But if we follow this road, I think we shall 
have to recognise that the problem of purity, taken in its human 
and not merely formal meaning, cannot be stated without the help 
of those ontological categories which we thought we were rid of for 
ever. The conception of purity generally held today in one sort of 
philosophy of art (and even of life perhaps) rests on the complete 
separation of form and content. But one has only to turn back to 
Wust's 'Witnessing Idea* to realise that when we take the 'purity* 
of a child as our standard, this is just the state of things which we 
cannot accept. We shall then have no other expedient than to allege 
the mythical nature of this so-called purity, and once more the 
'discoveries' of the psycho-analysts will be on the side of this refuta- 
tion of popular optimism. But we cannot help asking whether these 
would-be objective investigations are not really dedicated from the 
start to a kind of pseudo-Schopenhauerian and certainly atheist 
dogma, which rules and directs their practice before making use of 
their results. Even suppose and this is just an inverted form of 
simplicism that we consent to ascribe this 'purity* of spirit to a 
preconception, a milk-and-water notion held by adults and some- 
what suspiciously romanticised: we shall still have to ask whether 
the criticism also applies to the holy soul which through trials has 
learnt how to safeguard or even to win a purity, if not of feeling 
(that may be impossible), at least of will and, still more precious, of 

230 



vision. Here, we may be sure, the critic will be tempted to quarrel 
with the sheer notion of asceticism and self-improvement, as though 
every work done on one's-self and every labour of reform within 
implied a falsehood, were indeed an incarnate falsehood. A con- 
demnation all the more surprising, if we think of it, since the 
sincerity he preaches itself requires a kind of asceticism, because it is 
entirely directed against a willing blindness in us perhaps bound up 
with the state of our nature. 

The idea of sincerity as it has raged, especially in France, for the 
last ten years, seems to me to be deprived of all value by a single fact: 
that it is essentially a weapon but will not admit it, and the apparent 
disinterestedness which it vaunts is nothing but a cloak for its over- 
whelming desire for negative justification. If so, we cannot be too 
careful of those dangerous and from one aspect at least positively 
reckless alliances between sincerity and purity which seem to have 
been made in our time. Where sincerity becomes that indiscretion 
against the self so rightly condemned by Wust, it is explicitly 
turned against the only kind of purity which has a genuine spiritual 
value. Of course this does not mean, as I said before, that purity 
flourishes in a carefully preserved artificial twilight. Quite the 
reverse. It cannot be a mere coincidence that men of great purity 
seem to give out a light which shines on themselves as well as 
others. The halo, only discernible to the eye of the spirit, is one of 
those facts from which any metaphysician worthy of the name can 
draw almost unlimited wisdom. But this light which (mystics 
apart) the greatest of the painters have used with mysterious power 
to crown their achievements painters, I think, much more than 
writers 1 this light which is life because it is Love, cannot be too 

1 One can hardly help asking whether literary activity as such is not 
always in some degree except where it is purely lyrical turned against 
a certain fundamental purity of the soul. This is surely not the case in 
music or the plastic am. 

231 



sharply distinguished from the diabolical lucidity that may some- 
times be brought to bear upon appalling perversities, where the 
man who describes them has not the least desire to bring them to an 
end a light, indeed, which can illuminate the deepest shadows 
without taking away one jot of their suffocating gloom. 

Everything depends, I suppose, upon the hidden intention 
guiding the soul's vision of itself. Diabolical lucidity, I said; for 
therein hatred of the self is sometimes at work, but hatred of sin 
never. Hatred of the self; for the negative need of justification* tends 
to blot out all difference, all dividing lines, and to prove that sin 
docs not exist since it is simply me, and covers the country of my 
being from boundary to boundary. 

There is a lust for sincerity which is simply an exaltation of all 
the negative powers at my command; perhaps the most utterly 
Satanic of all forms of suicide, where extreme pride, in its boundless 
perversion, imitates extreme humility. If the soul thus surrenders to 
the 'demon of knowledge* without first submitting itself to any 
training or purification of the will, it is, though not of course with 
full awareness, setting up an idolatry for itself whose effects must be 
disastrous, because such idolatry encourages and upholds the satis- 
faction in despair of which we have seen such distressing examples 
around us. 

Lust for sincerity, idolatry of inward knowledge, perverse exalta- 
tion combined with a belittling analysis of the self these are just so 
many synonyms for a single evil: the blindfolding which makes it 
possible for the self to disregard that universal loving will at work 
everywhere, outside it and within. Piety towards one's-self cannot 
be separated for a moment from piety towards others, as we well 
know: this is why we can say that piety in its universal nature 
is the bond which for ever unites man, the whole of nature, aqd the 
whole of the spiritual world. This principle of unity is entirely 
spiritual, since it is a principle of love, and it stands over against 

232 



die chain of pure necessity underlying the union of merely natural 
phenomena. Wust even goes so far as to speak (rather vaguely, 
I think) of piety as the synthetising factor of an other-worldly 
chemistry, underlying the attraction at work between souls and 
their surroundings. Here, as elsewhere, he lets himself slide into a 
way of speech too directly borrowed from German early nine- 
teenth-century idealism; he is certainly going too far towards the 
pantheism which he will nevertheless reject at any price. And yet, 
however suspect we find the metaphors which he cannot help 
using, we do find in his work a sense (and it may be quite ac- 
curate historically) of the relation which brings together public 
life, taken in its coherent unity, and man's piety in the face of 
nature, as it flourished in ancient Rome and even in the Middle 
Ages. Is he not generally right in his contention that social relations 
become less close when the peasant and the craftsman give pkce to 
the tradesman (and the workman), and that when man loses con- 
tact with the soil and with real things, he is apt to be cut off from 
the very roots of his existence, so that even his culture becomes 
endangered? 1 

The peasant, for the very reason that he depends on nature, is 
bound to show patience towards nature; and because its details 
have become familiar to him, he unconsciously builds up a treasure- 
house of objective experience, and so comes little by little to wel- 
come the gifts of the earth as the wages of his labour and patience. 
For him there is no question of the 'crucifixion of nature*, the result 
of technical advancement where nothing but intellect and pure ego- 
ism arc needed, so that we can see the 'stigmata', so to speak, of the 
physical and mathematical sciences imprinted upon the modern 
world. Rightly or wrongly, Wust blames upon the philosophical 
doctrine of Kantianism the initial responsibility for the attitude im- 
plied by the sciences, and for the pillaging of nature by man which 
1 Naivitit uni Pktat, p. 133. 
233 



begins as soon as his relation with nature ceases to be the relation 
between two beings capable of mutual respect and adaptation. In 
the eyes of Wust, the mechanical science of nature is a son of tech- 
nique of burglary. Modern man, he says, has the mark of Cain 
upon him, and a 'Luciferean' character pervades the culture of 
those who have lost all piety towards the external world. 

It is not altogether easy to decide the worth of such an accusation; 
it seems to me that it contains some out-of-date sentimentality. 
Remarks of this kind often seem extremely useless, anyhow, because 
one cannot see that there is any way of 'getting back to Nature*. 
Among other objections to Wust's theory, there is nevertheless one 
which is not as cogent as it looks. How, it may be asked, can we 
hope to establish those relations between man and nature which 
rested upon an anthropomorphic interpretation now exploded? 

We must answer that modern thought is on this point also adopt- 
ing the most questionable metaphysical hypotheses as though they 
were axioms. Some minds may think they are completely free of the 
kind of ideology which started with Auguste Comte, and yet they 
will say, as though it were self-evident, that man advances from an 
infantile to an adult state of knowledge, and that the characteristic 
mark of the higher stage, which the 'intellectual leaders' of today 
have reached, is simply the elimination of anthropomorphism. This 
presupposes the most curious temporal realism, and perhaps especi- 
ally the most summary and simplicist picture of mental growth. 
Not only do they make a virtue of disregarding the positive and 
irreplaceable value of that original candour in the soul, not only do 
they make an idol of experience, by regarding it as the only way to 
spiritual dedication, but they also say in so many words that our 
minds are telling the time differently, since some are 'more 
advanced 9 , that is whether or not this is admitted nearer to a 
'terminus 9 . And yet, by an amazing contradiction, they are forbid- 
den to actualise that terminus even in thought. So that progress no 



longer consists in drawing nearer to one's end, but is described by a 
purely intrinsic quality of its own; although they will not consider 
its darker sides, such as old age and creaking joints, because they no 
doubt think that they are moving in a sphere where thought is 
depersonalised, so that these inevitable accidents of the flesh will be 
automatically banished. 

But the moment we allow, with Christian theology, that man is 
in some degree an image of God, not only is there no longer any 
question of our giving a negative verdict to anthropomorphism, 
but it is even clear that such a condemnation would entail sure 
spiritual danger. Peter Wust says, 4 It was fundamentally false, the 
view which prevailed among modern philosophers, when they 
fixed their eyes upon the infinitude of the mechanical universe; 
when there dawned upon them the opinion that Man must be 
expelled from the centre of the universe and was no more than an 
insignificant speck on the infinite extent of the cosmic whole/ 1 
That is true, but would it not be more accurate to say that it is the 
very idea of a 'centre of the universe* which is questioned by modern 
philosophy? The universe, especially since Kant, does not seem to 
include anything which can be treated as a centre, at least in the 
theoretical sense of the word. But by a very strange inversion, 
modern philosophy has come to substitute in the place of this real 
centre (now no longer conceivable) an imaginary focus existing in 
the mind. One could even maintain, without being paradoxical, 
that the 'Copernican revolution 9 has resulted in the setting-up of a 
new anthropocentric theory; though it differs from the old in no 
longer considering man as a being, but rather as a complex of 
epistemological functions. This anthropocentric theory also ex- 
cludes all attempts to 'picture* things in the likeness of man 
perhaps even to 'picture* them at all. The sense of analogy dis- 
appears at the same time as the sense of form. With them, the con- 
1 Naivitat mi Pietat, p. 161 

US 



crctc itself is swallowed up in the active gulf of science active 
because it actively devours. Today a new choice of alternatives 
might be said to have arisen, between the dehumanised anthropo- 
centric theory on the one hand, which tends to be favoured by 
idealist theories of knowledge; and a theocentric theory on the 
other, which, though it is fully realised by the heirs of mediaeval 
philosophy, seems to be only vaguely perceived by the lay philo- 
sophers. They have broken with all the speculation started by Kant, 
but they nevertheless will not acknowledge in its fulness that onco- 
logical need which lies at the very heart of our lives, and may even 
be the final secret of which our lives are the dark and wearisome 
childbed. 

This theocentricism is surely the thing to be emphasised if we 
Avant to see piety in its proper place in the whole spiritual economy. 
'Piety/ as Fichte had already said, 'forces us to respect whatever has 
a human countenance;' 'but here', adds Wust, 'it becomes the 
link which joins the huge and universal society of souls in a 
terrestrial and super-terrestrial union seen wholly and simul- 
taneously; a Civitas Dei, in the Augustinian sense, or a visible or 
invisible Church of God whose members, suffering, militant, and 
triumphant are linked by the filial relation which binds them all 
together to their Heavenly Father all, without exception, bidden 
to take their places at the eternal Supper of the Spirit/ 1 

Although the expression again leaves something to be desired in 

the way of strict terminology, I think we have nothing but praise 

for the universalism which stamps these declarations and gives them 

their pure and majestic tone. They are chiefly magnificent in their 

emphasis on the absolute precedence given, in this realm, to piety 

towards the 'Eternal Thou*. 'The paradox of the finite mind 9 , he 

writes, 'is its subjection to the continued polarity brought to bear 

upon him by the I and the Tbou. He tries to vanquish it in his 

1 NtMt&t und Pietat, p. 151. 

236 



compulsion to become a pure /, but he can only become a pure / 
by gravitating, with ever-increasing intensity, round the universal 
Thou of being and of all ontological community.' 1 

Perhaps it would be a good plan to discount this sort of language 
(as it is rather too directly derived from Fichte) and try to get at the 
inward and concrete significance of the notion expressed. 

In Wust's view, if we think that we can enter into more immedi- 
ate possession of ourselves and our proper reality by progressively 
cutting ourselves off from the particular communities in which we 
are at first involved, we are labouring under an illusion engendered 
by pride. He follows Tonnies in clearing up the disastrous confu- 
sion which the sociological school of our time had countenanced, 
by reminding us to make a clear distinction between community 
and society. 

By community, Tonnies understood a union founded upon 
kinship and love a union in which its members are joined in an 
almost organic embrace. Society, on the other hand, implied for 
him a type of union founded upon mere intellect divorced from 
love, a purely selfish calculation. But the pessimistic philosophy of 
culture professed by Tonnies did not give him scope to see all the 
inferences to be drawn from this distinction, nor even perhaps to 
explain it with perfect clarity. (It was also, perhaps, a little rash of 
him to put such a high value on the 'ties of blood'.) There is genu- 
ine community wherever man has kept the lifelines of his being 
intact: wherever he strongly asserts 'the natural inclination to love, 
which is itself love, and which goes down to the very depths of his 
soul'. An atmosphere, one might call it, but also a presence. Wust, 
in a bold metaphor, compares it to a battery which never needs re- 
charging, or a pump which draws up 'the eternal powers of the 
spirit in die autonomous organisation of our own personalities'. 
Although he may sometimes seem to do so, he never really condones 
1 Naivitat und Picttit, p. 159. 
237 



the excesses of the metaphysic of the Es or Impersonal Mind; on the 
contrary, he never ceases to warn us against them. He even refuses, 
in a page which I wish I could quote entirely, to admit the existence 
of that nature in God still found in some theistic philosophies 
perhaps in the later Schelling like a survival of those very mistakes 
which they claimed to have uprooted. The term nature must not, 
of course, be taken here to mean essence; 'in that sense, God 
obviously has a nature, since whatever is, has, and must have, an 
essence.* Wust's problem is whether there is a trans-personal sphere 
ip the reality of the absolute Spirit, and so an 'impersonal' 1 element, 
from which would spring, as by a natural process, the personal 
activity functioning on the pattern of the blind principle, the pure 
It, which rules nature. In other words, is Spinozan ontology valid? 
Wust objects, in terms reminiscent of Renouvier, that 'it always 
means ignoring the necessary precedence of personality over thing- 
hood. It is inconceivable that any sphere in God, however small, 
should be opaque to the light of Absolute Personality, a fact not so 
much central as unique. The Logos can be no stranger, even in the 
least degree, to the spirituality of the divine Person; He is one with 
it for ever in close and unbreakable identity/ 

But this does not mean that we can treat God's unfathomable 
abyss of love (Uebesabgrund) as a nature (irrational this time) existing 
in Him as a second and irreducible principle. 'It is only to us that 
the Eternal Love of the Creator, causing him to go outside his own 
blessed self-sufficiency, seems like an irrational principle. To us It 
may appear in an impersonal guise, at one remove from the God- 
head. But in fact It simply shows us a new aspect of His entirely 
personal Essence, the spirituality of the Absolute Person of God 
revealed along the lines of His free activity/ 9 This being so, we can 
see why all finite spiritual activity whatsoever, as soon as it is turned 
in a positive direction (towards order), can only be founded upon 
1 Nwittt und Pietat, p. 34. * ikid. f p. 163. 

238 



love; not so much an echo of God's eternal Love as a vague but 
irresistible answer awakened by It. In thus categorically asserting 
the .precedence of love over order, Wust removes even the possi- 
bility of our making an idol of the intellect. And thereby he makes 
it equally impossible for us to make an idol of the eternal truths, an 
idolatry which so limits the theistic affirmation as to rob it of its 
most positive value. We should observe that Wust, all through 
this part of his work, bases himself on the Augustinian theory, and 
makes use of the well-known formula omnia amare in Deo, so clearly 
the nodal point of all his views of piety; he especially throws a flood 
of light upon the central fact that piety towards ourselves is really 
nothing but a form of the fear of God. It only degenerates into 
selfishness and the root of all error when it is unduly separated from 
the highest form of piety, and turns its activity towards the 'sphere 
of immanence' (i.e. towards the most deceptive kind of autonomy). 
It is easy to see that Wust is exhorting us to make a complete 
spiritual 'reconstruction* of the whole personality, I think, the 
intellect as well as the will. It may be said without exaggeration 
that he achieved this for himself, with a kind of simple heroism, 
during the last years of his life. As he expressly said at the end of the 
Dialection of the Spirit, there is no question of making a sacrificium 
intellects \ such an abdication of the mind would be a mere act of 
despair. He seems to be asking of us simply this: that we should 
cease once for all to make a certain kind of demand the demand 
which he uses as a description of 'absolute gnosticism 9 and that 
we should give up the idea of attaining ultimate knowledge capable 
of being unfolded into an organic whole, since he has shown that 
such knowledge is incompatible with the fundamental character of 
Being. And here (at least in my eyes) here in this notion, or rather 
this intuition of the metaphysical value properly belonging to 
humility, lies Wust's most original contribution to the speculative 
thought of our day. 

239 



It is plain that its corollary, 'Pride is a source of blindness', is an 
essential pan of the 'library of human wisdom*. It is one of those 
truisms that lie buried under the dust of ages, and no one troubles 
to dig them up again because everyone thinks that their spiritual 
fertility is for ever exhausted. And yet, if we did take the trouble to 
apply this commonplace of personal ethics to the realm of de- 
personalised thought (so-called), we might be astonished to see 
what unexpected horizons unfolded before our eyes. 

As we have said before, there is an immense work of critical 
reconstruction to be done. The astonishingly free-and-easy assump- 
tions of the rival philosophies must be subjected to thorough and 
constant scrutiny. Only thus can we see through those doctrines 
which first strip the human mind of all its ontological attributes 
and powers, and then go on to endow it with some of the more 
awful prerogatives of that King whom they fondly believe they 
have dethroned. 



240 



