














E « n S rT.““'S p Loan 


FORDHAM UNIVERSITY.LIBRARY 
B2430.M253 D5 

Marcel, Gabriel, 1889-197 000 

The decline of wisdom / by Gab 010101 


0 201S 0204flb0 □ 


T">ns. #: 643576 IIIII||||||||||||||||||||||| 

Th ® dec,ine of wisdom 
^Marcei, Gabriel 

Cal.# B2430.M253 D5 ROSEHILL STACKS 
Due 9/30/2018 NO RENEWALS 

,LU 189273576 iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

PLEASE oo not remove 

loans TO ' JQW ' Mireya Murillo INTERLIBRARY 

Phone.-ZIS-^sgr^ "f' F 8:3 °-*°0 

684 mde, 9ado@fordham.edu 


FORDHAM UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

I 

I ^ ^ Deane 

I ^ 

I S S ^ r 0l l A d r hter than a<! d “‘a °a 

«ne of 5c fa cal ^ ° Ve " im ' S aere * a 
SPRING SEMESTER 


(SHf PKINTRO IN U.5.A, 









































* * * 

This is an authorized facsimile of the original book, and was 
produced in 1970 by microfilm-xerography by University 
Microfilms, A Xerox Company, Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A. 

* * o 




THE DECLINE 
OF WISDOM 

by 

Gabriel Marcel 



PHILOSOPHICAL LIBRARY 
NEW YORK 





































Other philosophical works by Gabriel Marcel 


THE MYSTERY OF BEING (Gifford Lectures, 1949, 1950) 
VOL. I REFLECTION AND MYSTERY 
VOL. II FAITH AND REALITY 

MEN AGAINST HUMANITY 
HOMO VIATOR 
METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 
BEING AND HAVING 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF EXISTENCE 


Dnuctyaou» Undergraduate 

Ubrar * OP #29,083 Library Shelf List 

29 Marcel, Gabriel, 1887- 

,M32 i955 & decline of wisdom - New York, Philosophical Library 

56 p, 23 cm. 


1. Philosophy—Addresses, essays, lectures. l Title. 


B29.M3G5 

Library of Congress 



55-3492 t 
Ml U 



■ ■ 
sr ■ o 




y 


o 









THE DECLINE OF WISDOM 


64 & 
KiilAcx- 


Published , 1955, 
by Philosophical Library, Inc . 

75 -Ear/ 40th Street, New York 16, N.Y. 

All rights reserved 


Printed in Great Britain for Philosophical Library by 
The Camelot Press Ltd., London and Southampton 










£■ 5- 36 6'2- 


CONTENTS 


Foreword ^ 

The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation i 

The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 21 

The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 37 


v 



















FOREWORD 

T HE most serious misunderstanding to which my work has 
given rise (among those who either know only a part of 
it, or who perhaps approach it with minds not altogether 
free from philosophical prejudice) is the belief that it is 

irrationalist. , 

The essays in this short volume will, I hope, prove how little 

basis there is for this judgment. 

In reflecting on the ever-increasing aberrations in the sphere 
of ethical and speculative thought and in that of aesthetics, 

I have found myself by reaction growing increasingly aware of 
certain values which I had spontaneously depreciated during 
the formative years of (what I do not like to call) my 
philosophy. 

These values are all related to wisdom and common sense. 

It is understandable that a philosophy whose direction is 
truly existential, in the sense given to the word by Kierkegaard 
and his disciples, should, to some extent, discredit such notions, 
and that wisdom, and, still more, common sense should seem 
from this point of view as in a sense devalued, devalued, that is, 
in relation to a state of consciousness which clings passionately 
to the most irreducibly individual elements contained in it. 

Inevitably, as I reacted against the exaggerations of such an 
existential philosophy, and in particular against the conception 
of an alleged primacy of existence over essence, I tended again 
to examine very seriously these values which had been impru¬ 
dently discredited, and I was drawn to this the more so as 
world events proved with glaring evidence that today humanity 
itself, and not only the individual, is dangerously tempted to 
commit suicide. It is of course possible to conceive, in the 
abstract, of a philosophy that discounts the increasing dangers 
and temptations of the world around us. But for one who like 
myself is opposed to the spirit of abstraction a philosophy of 
this sort can only seem to be a possibility without substance 

vii 


The Decline of Wisdom 

which the mind should deliberately reject. It is not therefore 
by chance that in these recent years I have been drawn into 
closer and closer contact with thinkers so deeply imbued with 
the sense of the universal as Gustav Thibon, Max Picard and 
poets such as T. S. Eliot. 













THE LIMITATIONS OF INDUSTRIAL 
CIVILISATION 


I NDUSTRIAL civilisation: the meaning of the words seems 
obvious, but I think only because they evoke a set of images 
and ready-made ideas. The moment we say ‘industrial civilisa¬ 
tion* we see factories, smoke, slums, suburbs, what have you, 
and all the commonplaces about mechanisation spring into 
our minds; ‘Mechanisation means progress’, or Mechanisation 
is a scourge' and so on. But none of it is enough to enable us to 
form even a preliminary concept. 

The trouble (as I have had occasion to say in a lecture I gave 
in Florence) is that the notion of civilisation itself has its 
ambiguities, and the idea of industrial civilisation, seemingly 
more exact, cannot help being affected by them. In principle, 
or rather at first, ‘civilisation’ meant the state of civilised man as 
against a state of being primitive—savagery, barbarism; this is 
an idea we already find in the philosophy of the Greeks, par¬ 
ticularly of Aristotle, and which, after suffering a number of 
mishaps, reappeared in force in the humanism of the Renais¬ 
sance. Perhaps we should note that its apparent obviousness 
and brilliance dimmed in proportion as the accent was placed 
upon original sin and its to some extent irreparable con¬ 
sequences. # , 

In the eighteenth century, however, at least in J. J. Rousseau s 
writings, it was confronted with a form of nature worship 
which pin-pointed its corruption; while in the nineteenth 
century, on the contrary, the West, fascinated by the progress 
of science and technics, seized on the idea of civilisation as the 
reward of the fullest development of man’s rational faculties. 
For positivism and all the schools of thought connected with it, 
civilisation was the triumph of enlightened order o\er con¬ 
fusion, violence and disorder. The optimists of a hundred years 
ago even thought of it as the means to universal peace, imply¬ 
ing the gradual substitution of right for might and bringing 
with it not only generally increased well-being, but as a 


i 


The Decline of Wisdom 

corollary the harmonious development of the sciences and 
the arts. 

It would be difficult for us after the events of the past half- 
century to share this optimism and in particular to see why 
man’s growing mastery over nature should go hand in hand 
with the triumph of right. In any case, the development of 
historical science and sociology has in the meantime given rise 
to a very different conception. In place of the over-all and in 
many ways confused notion of civilisation as a whole there has 
grown up the idea of civilisations which are not only distinct 
but altogether separate and irreducible to one another’s terms, 
civilisations which may co-exist, though not without friction, 
but which are ever in danger of replacing one another in 
circumstances which are always tragic. 

It became more and more evident, especially in the light of 
ethnological discoveries, that those whom the civilised had 
presumptuously labelled savages had their own civilisation 
with its perfectly recognisable structure and cohesion. 

It is tempting to say that in view of all this there came about 
a dissociation between the ideas of civilisation and value which 
in the global concept had been inseparable. Actually I do not 
believe that this can ever be absolute; it would be more true 
to say that with the development of a pluralist and historicist 
theory of civilisations, values came to be relativised —if I may be 
forgiven so barbarous a term. However you define it, a civilisa¬ 
tion implies beliefs—that is to say, values; what is dangerous is 
to assert a priori that these values are necessarily those which 
rationalist European thought, starting with the Greeks, has 
attempted to define as universal. Not that I would say that 
such a reduction is necessarily impossible, only that it would 
need the utmost caution. 

Can any of this help us to see a little further into what 
‘industrial civilisation’ means ? 

Obviously it is quite different from a rural civilisation, for 
example. We have only to think of England to see how these 
two sorts of civilisation were able to co-exist for a very long 
time, even in juxtaposition; nor can it be said that their co¬ 
existence has now ended, though everything goes to show that 


2 










The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

industrial civilisation is predominating and this in circum¬ 
stances which can easily be defined. 

What is also evident is that each of these civilisations forms 
around a particular way of life, and above all that each of these 
ways of living belongs to its own particular environment. 

I have been greatly struck by what Georges Friedmann has 
to say about what he calls the technical environment as against 
the natural environment. 

The Technical Environment 

In the natural environment man is present in his work. ‘The 
span of work is as yet no bigger than that of man’s natural 
movements in their technical capacity. The tools which homo 
faber uses in his natural environment may be complex but their 
interposition between his hand or foot and the material on 
which he is at work does not mean that his part in production 
is eliminated. On the contrary, they humanise production 
further since they make it possible to manufacture something 
to which the craftsman, who completes the work himself, brings 
greater continuity and precision, carrying out his plan and 
giving it the harmony of a finished whole. In such a profession 
as medicine this fullness of human presence is still noticeable.’ 

The natural environment as such is a climate of presence and 
sympathy. In it ‘a life rich in direct understanding, in presence, 
is combined with the spread of craftsmanship and the begin¬ 
nings of industry’. 

Nothing more different from this could be found than the 
technical environment which, as such, is artificial and inhuman 
in the strongest sense, even where everything has been done to 
improve the material conditions of work. ‘In this milieu’, 
says Georges Friedmann, ‘boredom is the worker’s mate, the 
only possible escape is on the side of man’; and Georges Navel, 
the author of Traveaux and Parcours , who has been through this 
experience, writes: 

In the world of the factory all that there remains of nature is man, 
the companion, the fellow being. If you were alone in it you would 
die. No trees, no plants, no dogs. Everything you touch is hard, 
dense; next to it the soft stuff of which your hand is made seems 

3 


The Decline of Wisdom 

very fragile. In that fluid world of metal it is reassuring to meet a 
comrade. 

Georges Friedmann comments that so long as this world 
is still frequented by men, by comrades, there is a chance of 
conquering it, of moulding it to the ends of culture and dignity. 
Nothing could be more true, I think, but we must still ask 
ourselves on what terms this comradeship can remain genuine. 
It stares us in the face that it is in grave danger of being im¬ 
paired by the intrusion of politics, or if you like of propaganda. 

The moment men are brought in whose function is to pass on 
slogans, a milieu which was still living and charged with 
currents of friendship and even genuine brotherhood is in 
danger of being frozen, or to put it in another way, of turning 
into a field for the transmission of quite different currents, 
which are inhuman and magnetised by the ends purely of 
domination. 

A question which arises here is whether people whose training 
has been almost exclusively technical are not much more 
susceptible to this kind of propaganda than those who have 
received what at the beginning of this century was still called 
a general culture. Not that I would suggest a return to the 
teaching of the classics as it was conceived at the end of the 
nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries; but 
it seems that a counterweight to the growing technical trend in 
education needs to be invented. 

A strictly complementary aspect of industrial civilisation is 
brought to light in this fine passage by Spengler which occurs 
in the last chapter of his Decline of the West: 1 

Then followed . . . the discovery of the steam engine. . . . Till 
then nature had rendered services, but now she was tied to the yoke 
as a slave, and her work was as though in contempt measured by a 
standard of horse-power. We advanced from the muscle-force of 
the Negro, which was set to work in organised routines, to the 
organic reserves of the Earth’s crust, where the life-forces of millennia 
lay stored as coal; and today we cast our eyes on inorganic nature, 
where water-forces are already being brought in to supplement coal. 
As the horse-powers run to millions and milliards, the numbers of 
the population increase and increase, on a scale that no other 
1 Allen and Unwin, 1926. 












The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

Culture ever thought possible. This growth is a product of the Machine , 
which insists on being used and directed, and to that end centuples 
the forces of each individual. For the sake of the machine, human 
life becomes precious. Work becomes the great word of ethical 
thinking; in the eighteenth century it loses its derogatory implication 
in all languages. The machine works and forces the man to co¬ 
operate. The entire Culture reaches a degree of activity such that 
the earth trembles under it. 

And what now develops, in the space of hardly a century, is a 
drama of such greatness that the men of a future Culture, with other 
souls and other passions, will hardly be able to resist the conviction 
that £ in those days’ nature herself was tottering. The politics stride 
over cities and peoples; even the economics, deeply as they bite into 
the destinies of the plant and animal worlds, merely touch the fringe 
of life and efface themselves. But this technique will leave traces of 
its heyday behind it when all else is lost and forgotten. For this 
Faustian passion has altered the Face of the Earth. 

This is the outward- and upward-straining life-feeling—true 
descendant, therefore, of the Gothic—as expressed in Goethe’s 
Faust monologue when the steam-engine was yet young. The 
intoxicated soul wills to fly above space and Time. An ineffable 
longing tempts Man to indefinable horizons. He would free himself 
from the earth, rise into the infinite, leave the Bonds of the body, 
and circle in the universe of space amongst the stars. That which the 
glowing and soaring inwardness of St. Bernard sought at the 
beginning, that which Griinewald and Rembrandt conceived in 
their backgrounds, and Beethoven in the trans-earthly tones of his 
last quartets, comes back now in the intellectual intoxication of the 
inventions that crowd one upon another. Hence the fantastic traffic 
that crosses the continents in a few days, that puts itself across oceans 
in floating cities, that bores through mountains, rushes about in 
subterranean labyrinths, uses the steam-engine till its last pos¬ 
sibilities have been exhausted, and then passes on to the gas-engine, 
and finally raises itself above the roads and railways and flies in the 
air; hence it is that the spoken word is sent in one moment over all 
the oceans; hence comes the ambition to break all records and beat 
all dimensions, to build giant halls for giant machines, vast ships 
and bridge-spans, buildings that deliriously scrape the clouds, 
fabulous forces pressed together to a focus to obey the hand of a child, 
stamping and quivering and droning works of steel and glass in 
which tiny man moves as unlimited monarch and, at the last, feels 
nature as beneath him. 

And these machines become in their forms less and ever less 
human, more ascetic, mystic, esoteric. They weave the earth over 
with an infinite web of subtle forces, currents, and tensions. Their 


The Decline of Wisdom 

bodies become ever more and more immaterial, ever less noisy. 
The wheels, rollers, and levers are vocal no more. All that matters 
withdraws itself into the interior. Man has felt the machine to be 
devilish, and rightly. It signifies in the eyes of the believer the 
deposition of God. It delivers sacred Causality over to man and by 
him, with a sort of foreseeing omniscience, is set in motion, silent 
and irresistible. 

The expression ‘Faustian passion’ may be surprising, but its 
use is justified by certain texts in Act IV of the Second Faust. 
‘The earthly sphere, 5 declares Faust, ‘is still big enough, I find, 
for big actions whose success may light up the world. I feel in 
myself a great strength ready to be used with courage. 5 And a 
little further he speaks to the Emperor of ‘spirits silently at 
work in the depths of unfathomable abysses, decomposing and 
combining rich emanations into rare, metallic gases and 
ceaselessly inventing new things 5 . So I think it is legitimate to 
keep Spengler’s expression and to describe the values of 
industrial civilisation as Faustian. Perhaps by exploring this 
notion and by linking it with that of the industrial environment, 
we may have a chance to discover the limits of this civilisation. 

There is every evidence that there is in it a fundamental 
paradox. 

The Characteristics of Technical Progress 

It is evident that the mastery of the forces of nature by means 
of increasingly elaborate technical processes is a liberation 
which should be welcomed as such; but it is no less true that, 
for reasons which must be examined, this liberation is in danger 
of being itself turned into a slavery. It is in this contradiction 
that the drama of industrial civilisation lies. Going back to the 
ambiguity I mentioned at the beginning, I would say that, 
again for the same reasons, this particular civilisation is in 
danger of developing against certain universal values which 
would seem to be a part of civilisation in general. 

But here we must be very careful. In his valuable book 1 on 
Work and Civilisation, M. Hyacinthe Dubreuil very properly 
and forcefully denounces the judgments which intellectuals often 

1 Travail et Civilisation, 1953, Hon, Paris. 







The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

make upon realities of which they have no expeiience. I believe 
his criticism to be fully justified and I am most anxious, in 
what follows, to avoid any such mistake. 

‘Literature which attacks technical progress and machinery 
and turns them into a sort of monster’, writes M. Dubreuil, ‘is 
a waste of time. It is a case of mistaken identity; for although if 
work is badly done, somebody is responsible, the villain is not 
the lifeless machine but man who has decided to use it wrongly . 5 

I should like to distinguish between these two statements. 
The first is perfectly correct: it is ridiculous to denounce 
technical progress as such (I will come back to this point, for 
I am anxious not to leave the slightest ambiguity). The second 
assertion seems to me, however, to imply an over-simplification 
and I would even say a mistake: man has not ‘decided 5 to use 
the lifeless machine wrongly; the truth is infinitely more com¬ 
plex, as we shall see. 

As to the absurdity of condemning technical progress in 
itself, I think it is possible to establish certain principles which 
it would be hard to dispute. To start with a definition, let us 
say simply that a technique is a specialised and rationally 
elaborated form of knowledge, and let us add that the tech¬ 
niques we are concerned with here are all skills which con¬ 
tribute to the transformation of the world. They all offer 
certain basic characteristics which it would be difficult to 
overstress. 

(1) They are specialised and, almost always, within their 
own specialised field they tend to give rise to new forms of 
specialisation. 

( 2 ) They are perfectible. 

( 3 ) And they are transmissible. Indeed, the more rationalised 
they are, the more easily can they be transmitted. 

What does run the danger of getting lost is what craftsmen 
call a knack, something that can only be passed on by example 
if at all, and not by any theoretical training or instruction. 
Again, certain empirical recipes may have been lost because 
they were never, properly speaking, fixed. But a technique such 
as we conceive it today is transmissible by definition. 

The perfectibility of techniques should also be emphasised, 

7 


The Decline of Wisdom 

and we must note particularly that in this field perfectibility 
has an exact and univocal meaning. If in fact one technical 
process is better than another it is because it improves output or 
makes it possible to produce the same amount in less time or at 
less cost (in either case production is by definition improved). 
What is interesting from the philosophical point of view is that 
in this technical domain alone the word progress has kept the 
fullness of its meaning. To see the truth of this we have only to 
take a look at the fog in which it wraps itself the moment it is 
applied, say, to morals or to institutions. The reason is that the 
criteria applicable to ethics, politics or indeed aesthetics can 
not have the same precision as they have in the field of technics. 
I believe this to be a most important point, and I think that if 
the theories of progress current since the eighteenth century 
and particularly since Condorcet have been so deceptive this 
may largely be due to the neglect of its basic truth. It could be 
shown, I think, that if there is such a thing as social progress it 
is to the extent that there exist social techniques. 

But after all the essential questions are those which have to 
do with human happiness, or shall we say contentment on the 
one hand and with spiritual quality on the other. And it has 
yet to be shown that the progress of social techniques as such 
is sufficient either to increase contentment or to develop 
spiritual quality. Only the most rudimentary psychology could 
induce us without further argument to believe it does. 

The Positive Value of Technical Progress 

I have blamed myself recently, particularly when I was 
lecturing in South America, with not having perhaps brought 
out sufficiently in my writings what I would call the positive 
value of technical progress. I am not thinking only of its use¬ 
fulness—only a lunatic would deny that—but of something 
more than mere utility. There is no doubt that in applying a 
technique which he has mastered the technician experiences 
a joy which is not only basically innocent, but even noble. It 
is a joy which is bound up with the consciousness of power over 
inanimate things, that is to say, over a reality which is subordin¬ 
ate and is in a sense meant to be controlled by man. 

3 








The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

It is true that things offer a resistance, but it is, as it were, the 
resistance of inertia which it is good to overcome. Moreover, it 
can only be overcome by means which have an extreme pre¬ 
cision. The value of a technique is that of the precision with 
which it is applied, and we must remember the connection 
between precision and intellectual honesty. 

A link notion—and it already bears an ethical or at least 
pre-ethical character—is that of accuracy. No technician can 
do without the virtue of accuracy: in his world inaccuracy is 
always punished and the punishment is sometimes terrible. 
Hence the awareness of responsibility which he incessantly 
carries with him. 

At the same time this awareness has to be of a particularly 
subtle kind. It must not invade the foreground of his conscious¬ 
ness but must remain on its outer fringes. A surgeon performing 
an operation cannot forget his responsibility for a moment, 
but it must not weigh on him to the point of being an obsession: 
it is not on this that he must focus or even concentrate his mind 
but oh his task; responsibility is rather the spirit in which his 
task is carried out or the light in which he sees it, and this is 
the very light of his sense of accuracy and precision. 

And, again, there is the purity and soundness of the joy which 
goes with technical research when it results in a discovery. I am 
inclined to think that what is positive in all this is that the 
technician is not thinking of himself, but of his task, and here 
again there is the saving virtue of precision. It is true, of course, 
that the technician is a man and that it is natural for him to 
think of the personal advantage his success may bring him, but 
this consideration is, as it were, collateral; his research work in 
itself holds no room for vanity, for the time being at any rate 
it literally drives it out. In this the technician differs from the 
intellectual or the artist; in a sense his work is necessarily more 
pure, it leaves literally no place for ambition or flattery. 

Alain distinguishes between human attitudes involved in 
actions applied to things and those applied to people. It is 
indeed far simpler for an action to be pure if it bears on things, 
while to act on people, or to be more accurate, to bring to 
bear on them the techniques which are rightly applicable to 


B 


9 


The Decline of Wisdom 

things is, we shall see, an abuse pregnant with the gravest 
consequences. ° 

The Effect of Technical Progress on Man 

All this brings us to the second of M. Dubreuil’s assertions, 
the one concerning the wrong use of the machine. I have 
already said that I disagree with it. 

We might say, using Christian terms—and these terms are 
urged on us not only by faith but also by reflection—that it is 
in the nature of techniques to lead the mind into temptation. 
But we must immediately qualify this statement. It would 
obviously be absurd to think of techniques as wielding power 
in their own right; it is always a being who leads into 
temptation. 

I do not, of course, intend to go into the problem of daemon- 
ology, although it undoubtedly arises on the fringes of our 
enquiry. All we have to ask ourselves here, and this without 
trespassing beyond experience, is what the notion of temptation 
means and in what circumstances it may become active. My 
view is that it is invariably bound up with power. The moment 
that we are endowed with power of whatever sort we are 
exposed to the temptation of abusing it. How are we to account 

for this face which is so intimately part of our way of being?_ 

I think that it is nearly always a phenomenon which could be 
compared to vertigo—vertigo being the impulse to ‘let oneself 
go to’ something. 

What I mean is this. The exercise of any sort of power should 
by rights be accompanied by the exercise of control over this 
power itself—this is a sort of ‘power at one remove’. But in 
practice such concomitance of strength and control over that 
strength is by no means inevitable. We find, on the contrary, 
that the more suddenly power is acquired—or at any rate the 
less the conditions of its acquisition are like those of natural 
growth the more does it tend to behave as a parvenu', like a 
self-made man who believes (always quite wrongly) that he is 
in no man’s debt, it rejects, as though it were an unwarrantable 
intrusion or encroachment, any form of limitation or control 
over itself. 


io 










The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

This being said, my suggestion that it is in the nature of 
techniques to lead the mind into temptation simply amounts 
to this: a man who has mastered one or more techniques tends 
in principle to distrust what is alien to these techniques; or 
rather, he will at a pinch admit the validity of this or that other 
technique he has only heard of or knows only at second hand; 
but he will usually be most unwilling to accept the idea that 
a meta-technical activity may have value. But in respect of 
technical power which is immediate, what I have called power 
at one remove is necessarily meta-technical. Indeed it is these 
powers at one remove which, in a technical civilisation, are 
most likely to be discredited. 

But let us not forget that the activity among all others which 
can most truly be described as power at one remove is reflection. 
And in fact, everything goes to show that in a civilisation of 
this sort the importance of reflection will be minimised if not 
denied. Already we see logico-mathematical nco-positivism, 
a philosophy which denies the role of reflection altogether, 
gradually invading England and a part of the United States; 
to the philosophers of this school, the idea of a philosophy of 
reflection is utterly alien, they almost put it aside as a sort of 
mysticism. 

At this point our analysis must be taken a step further. 
Whence does reflection spring? I mean true reflection which 
on n account must be confused with some kind of ratiocination. 
I once wrote in Being and Having, ‘Power at one remove is 
nourished by a blindfolded intuition; this intuition is something 
that I am, not something that I have’, and it belongs to 
philosophical thought to retrieve it and, as it were, to make it 
articulate. 

But let us not linger in this abstract realm. The more the 
world I dwell in is alive, the more generously it is watered by 
life, the more my intuition—and I would really prefer to call 
it, my participation—will be rich and substantial at its source. 
But does this not bring us back to the difference between 
natural and technical environment? For there is no doubt that 
t]hc technical environment is the poorest possible in life, the 
furthest possible removed from nature. While in the natural 


The Decline of Wisdom 

environment, as Friedmann writes, ‘the whole of human life and 
in particular the whole life of work is woven through and 
through by those rhythms which, flowing from generation to 
generation, have been gradually formed and established in the 
society to which they so intimately belong’. 

I would not in the least suggest our indulging in some sort of 
pseudo-romantic hankering after a lost paradise, a paradise 
whose undoubted benefits, we may be sure, were balanced by 
terrible disadvantages. All I am trying to show is that although 
we cannot speak, like M. Dubreuil, of unwillingness or of ill 
will on the part of man, technical development does, taken in 
itself, tend to create a world which is singularly barren and as 
a result unfavourable to the use of powers at one remove; and 
let us note that these powers correspond fairly closely to what 
in other ages was known as wisdom. 

As a simple illustration of what I mean by a barren world 
take the family and the danger it runs in a technical milieu 
where the women work as well as men, the children are virtu¬ 
ally left to themselves and there often arises between them and 
their parents a sort of mutual hostility. When I spoke of a 
world which is generously watered by life I was thinking 
particularly of the benefits of a strongly established family. 

But what is it that wisdom as such is normally called upon 
to oppose? It stands over against hybris , pride. Where the 
counterweight to pride is lacking, the techniques left, as it 
were, to their own weight, arc moreover burdened by the 
weight of pride which in no sense belongs to them. For once 
again, it is not that the techniques have an intrinsic reality; 
they are only given a specious reality through a vice of abstrac¬ 
tion in the one who uses them, takes his pleasure in them and 
lastly becomes their slave. 

To put it differently, techniques tend to become the dynamic 
lineaments of an abstract world in which the intellect is the 
more at ease the more it is specialised. Actually, this mental 
agility is the result of a training of which the value, I repeat, is 
not disputable. But this training implies no contact at any point 
with an environment which is concrete and, as it were, not 
altogether explicitly definable; in this it is the opposite of 







The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

organic growth, and I am not thinking only of the growth of the 
body, but of a feeling, a belief, of the becoming of the imagina¬ 
tion in all its forms. 

The Abstract Character of Industrial Environment 
By an odd coincidence, I have just read the following passage 
in a book by Helmuth Gollwitzer 1 which contains one of the 
most objective criticisms I have ever come across of Soviet 
man: 

This system neither recognises any subject as confronting it nor 
as a result does it allow the development of any such subjects, 
whether individuals or groups, and this means exactly that here 
nothing is allowed to grow. If life is unfettered growth in conformity 
with its own laws, this is surely the gravest accusation that can be 
brought. And indeed, for the life of the community, both the 
spiritual and the economic consequences of this fact are terrible. 
There is room for nothing but pre-established plans and manu¬ 
factured objects: anything that grows is suspect. 

It can of course be objected that what is true of the Soviet 
world is not necessarily true of industrial civilisation in general, 
but is this not perhaps merely because in other countries that 
civilisation has not yet unfolded all its implications? Thus in 
ihe United States, the logic of technocracy sometimes comes 
up against a sentimentality which can be almost childish, while 
on other occasions it goes hand in hand with a confused 
religiosity. But what matters to us is to discover what this logic 
really is and the ways in which it shows itself. 

There are two points which seem to me of the highest 
importance. 

Firstly, there is a danger of the technical environment 
becoming for us the pattern of the universe, that is to say, the 
categories of its particular structure being claimed to be valid 
for an objective conception of the world. 

And note that this is not a matter of interpretation only; the 
interpretation becomes embodied, it seeks to reconstitute the 
world, moulding it to its own image. Never shall I forget my 

i Und Fiihrer Woher du Nicht Willst, Munich, Kaiser Verlag, 1953. 

*3 


The Decline of Wisdom 

impression on first coming to a country such as Venezuela, 
where I had the feeling that what had been a landscape was 
being turned into a builder’s yard. There you may witness the 
kind of planned sectioning and cutting up which I would 
venture to call sacrilegious. I had this feeling most strongly in 
Rio de Janeiro, where the hills were going to be levelled with¬ 
out the slightest consideration for the reality of the original 
site. This is something very significant; whereas in the past a 
city moulded itself on the natural structure or pre-structure, as 
it were fulfilling it, we are likely to see larger and larger 
agglomerations piling up without the slightest regard for the 
natural pre-formation. There is not the least hesitation in 
doing violence to nature to carry out an abstract plan. 

These words, abstract, abstraction, keep coming back, and 
this cannot be helped because it is just the crux of it. But we 
must try to understand the reason for this predominance in the 
industrial world of the abstract, the planned, the organised, 
the dissected. It is a difficult question because the causes and 
conditions arc so tangled up that we cannot be sure of discover¬ 
ing all at once which of them is the key to all the others. It is 
likely anyway that here, as so often, the categories of cause and 
effect have to be transcended and the vicious circle is the rule. 
Mass production on a scale which was inconceivable in the 
past is of course related to the existence of the masses whose 
needs must be satisfied and for the satisfaction of whose needs 
an individualised economy is inadequate. 

But these masses are not only at the beginning, but at the 
end; I mean that they are themselves—as masses—partly the 
result of mass production and its consequences in every 
economic field. There is also the fact that big industry tends 
itself to create the needs which it later claims to satisfy. And no 
doubt it must be added that’ this whole process becomes 
increasingly inevitable as tin.e goes on, or if you prefer, it tends 
to create its own inevitability. 

So far as I can see (but I must again stress that my lack of 
competence forbids me to speak categorically) we are con¬ 
fronted by an enormous system which consolidates itself more 
and more, so that it is less and less easy to see the logical 


14 











The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

possibility of anything altering it in principle. ‘Logical’, I said, 
but history is there to show us how inadequate are such logical, 
rational considerations. The mysterious role of crises, catas¬ 
trophes, even natural upheavals may be to bring into play 
compensating elements, which act, however, in ways that 
confound our reason. 

The Process of Dehumanisation and the Technicality of Knowledge 

It is of course an absurd illusion to think that by means of 
some sort of world planning these calamities can be kept 
permanently at bay. 

But there is something more important still. It is impossible 
for man not to consider himself as part of this cosmos—or of 
this a-cosmos—planned and dissected by the technicians; as 
a result, he inevitably becomes ? target for those techniques 
which, in principle, are legitimately applicable only to the 
outward world. There are already countless instances of this in 
the fields of experimental psychology, psychiatry and so on. 

One of the most characteristic of them is the incredible 
development of the use of tests in America and in the American¬ 
ised countries. There are, of course, certain fields where their 
use is altogether justified; I would say that such a field is that 
of motor-sensory behaviour; it is perfectly proper to determine 
by means of tests whether a given person is fit to exercise 
certain well defined functions directly related to such activity 
—to be a pilot or a truck driver, for instance. But the more we 
leave this field for that of the intelligence properly so called, 
that is to say, of understanding and a fortiori of affectivity, the 
objection to the use of tests is grave, even decisive. 

Experimentation, if we reflect upon it, should as such be 
handled warily; but the striking fact is that, for the reasons I 
have given, it is reflection which is simply set aside in these 
Americanised countries. I have had a recent confirmation of it 
in talking with a Swedish psychologist who told me that he had 
literally discovered since he came to France the limitations of 
certain techniques which were sanctioned in his own country 
without the slightest warning as to the conditions in which they 
could be suitably applied. 


The Decline of Wisdom 

But we must see that as soon as the technical environment 
has become the predominating, general, normal environment, 
it is strictly normal for such techniques to become generalised 
and to proliferate. This is one more victory for abstraction, the 
individual being now a unit whom it is possible and right to 
deal with as with all the other units in his category. 

And what becomes of the distinction between the normal and 
the abnormal? It will almost inevitably be interpreted in a 
behaviourist sense. It is normal for the individual placed in 
such and such conditions to react in a given way and any 
anomaly is a failure to adapt himself. The end of it, almost 
certainly, is what I would call a general pragmatisation of human 
beings and relations, as indeed we see in American and Ameri¬ 
canised countries such as Sweden. The astonishingly high 
incidence of psychosis in these countries is enough to show that 
the system which they seem to have adopted involves a tragic 
oversight of certain deep human exigencies, and this is perhaps 
the more convincing because these are countries which are 
prosperous and where all the basic needs seem generally 
speaidng to be satisfied. But the ravages caused in them by 
boredom, sexual immorality and drunkenness are, as it were, 
irrefutable symptoms of a deep-seated lesion, of what I would 
indeed prefer to call a sin against life itself. 

But make no mistake—that sin is most intimately bound up 
with a certain technical representation of the world. I would 
say that as a result of the act by which man projects upon the 
world the light of a knowledge which is technicalised, an 
increasingly monstrous image of the world and of himself is 
thrown back at him—an image which is ever more distorted 
and ever less decypherable. 

Is this not indeed perhaps the unrecognisable image which 
so often faces us in modern art? In general, the consequences 
of all this are incalculable, particularly in what relates to self- 
knowledge. The Socratic axiom implied the idea of an identity 
between the knower and the known, and this idea was at the 
basis of traditional philosophy until Hegel. But now, following 
upon the hyperbolic development of technics, a development 
of which the so-called acceleration of history is perhaps in some 

16 


15 










The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

ways only a corollary, the truth of this postulate is increasingly 
put in doubt. As a result the subject tends less and less to be 
treated as a subject and is consequently less and less respected. 
Hence that spreading violation of privacy which is one of the 
most horrifying features of the modern world, whose worst 
excesses in this direction show themselves in literature. 

It might at least be thought that, as a beneficent counterpart 
to all this, the new skills might strengthen man’s hold on his 
earthly habitation; unfortunately experience belies it, and the 
reason is doubtless that in such a world the very idea of taking 
root ends by seeming contradictory. What we said of agglomer¬ 
ations replacing cities is relevant: an agglomeration is, as it 
were, the very embodiment of uprootedness. 

In such a world the mass transfers of populations which have 
taken place in the totalitarian countries should no longer be 
considered an anomaly. On the contrary, they may well be¬ 
come the rule once the vital link is broken between man and 
his environment and people are seen as mere units of pro¬ 
duction—as machines which are needed here or there for 
reasons connected with the general economy and whose 
feelings are of not the slightest interest. Indeed, perhaps it 
would be best so to train these men-machines that their needs 
and feelings would become atrophied and in the end vanish! 

I remember once being told by someone who was dealing 
with the terrible problem of Displaced Persons that some 
country or other only wanted people who could make shoes! 
The entity one-who-can-make-shoes is substituted for the 
concrete reality of so-and-so, married to such and such a 
person and father of such and such a child. 

This indeed is again the sin against life understood in its 
deepest sense. Life is no longer, as it were, conceived except in 
bio-sociological terms, that is to say, as a process whose physico¬ 
chemical conditions are claimed to be strictly and objectively 
definable and which exists in view of a given task which relates 
to the collectivity. 

Here again the wildest excesses of the totalitarian regimes 
seem only to be the ultimate expression of a monstrous logic, 
the logic of dehumanisation. It is easy enough to show that its 

*7 


The Decline of Wisdom 

hallmark is always that of the will to power. And no doubt 
we shall always feel the need to find a scapegoat in whom to 
localise that will. Indeed it is quite possible that at the outset, 
some one person hungering for domination helped to launch 
this terrifying venture. But it must not be forgotten that by 
now the system is endowed with its own power of self-consolida¬ 
tion, which incidentally is the crowning absurdity, since it may 
in the end involve us in the sacrifice of all, certainly not for all 
but precisely for no one—an immense holocaust to nothingness. 

But how should we not see in all this a huge inverted carica¬ 
ture of what the Christian can only call the plan of salvation ? 
I have said inverted for if on the one side sacrifice is the very 
expression of love, on the other it is the manifestation of a 
devitalised rationality which is already turning human beings 
into robots. But this glaring opposition can only be seen at the 
furthest limit, because undeniably, so long as this enormous 
process of dehumanisation is still on its way, it involves qualities 
which are genuinely spiritual, especially generosity, although 
of that generosity it tends, by the strangest paradox, to dry up 
the springs and as it were to preclude the very possibility. Thus 
I do not hesitate to say that, if we could discover what this 
process is at bottom and in principle, putting aside the illusions 
and misconceptions which it encourages and exploits, we would 
see that it cannot be considered as anything except basically 
daemoniac. 

Remedies for the Dehumanisation of the World 

So I do no violence to my argument if I say that the world is 
in need of exorcism. But this is obviously a misleading term and 
I have in mind no sort of magic formulae. The only genuinely 
exorcising power is that of love, and even then love needs to 
be incarnate. 

But as we have known for twenty centuries, such an incarna¬ 
tion, if it can take place at all, can only do so at the humblest 
level. There must be a Bethlehem of reflection and fervour and 
this I see as the only genuine hearth and nourishment for 
thought anxious to avoid at all cost falling into ideology or still 
worse into foolish sentimentality. 

18 












The Limitations of Industrial Civilisation 

But nothing I have said should make us forget the considera¬ 
tions we started from. It would indeed be to fall under the joint 
spells of sentimentalism and ideology to hope for some sort of 
Gandhi revolution and a return to a pre-technical age. The 
burden of technics has been assumed by man and he can no 
longer put it down because he finds it heavy. The consequences 
of such an abdication would be catastrophic. Just as in be¬ 
coming de-Christianised humanity tends to fall far below the 
level of pre-Christian civilisation, so in giving up what must 
after all be called the conquests of science it would fall into the 
lowest degradation. 

So the problem—and of course, here we can only state it—is 
only to know how we may struggle efficaciously against the 
weight by which in a technical age man is dragged down into 
the excesses of technocracy. If the word liberty, today so 
dishonoured, still has any meaning, it is strictly applicable to 
this act. But clearly, it is not just a question of putting on a 
brake: no genuine action can be merely negative. It is a 
question of mobilising such forces as are capable of effectively 
opposing this immense drift; that these forces are spiritual 
nobody will deny; but spiritual is another word which is 
frequently misinterpreted and misspent. What I think we need 
today is to react with our whole strength against that dissocia¬ 
tion of life from spirit which a bloodless rationalism has brought 
about. 

This does not mean that we should go back to some sort of 
false romanticism—I must admit that I find traces of it even in 
Bergson. Perhaps the most important task on the plane of 
speculation is to deepen once again the notion of life itself in 
the light of the highest and most genuine religious thought. 
I have had occasion recently to observe that in Germany some 
such new development seems to be taking place, in profound 
reaction against the aberrations which have for so long dis¬ 
figured the very image of that country. 

But it must be added at once that this development, which 
can only take place on the highest levels of spirituality and 
reflective thought, can never reach the fullness of its authenticity 
and value unless it has its counterpart in the sphere of action, 


19 


The Decline of Wisdom 

and it is here that the need for humility can be plainly seen. 
For to have exorcising power, action must be on the level of 
good will, that is to say, love of one’s neighbour. It is impossible, 
I think, to condemn too mercilessly the illusion of achieving 
anything by introducing into spirituality the sort of planning 
operations which can only act against the spirit. 

I have spoken of meta-technical activities; the proper place 
of meta-technics is at the juncture of the spiritual and the vital, 
in a mysterious region which is also that of the charismata . 

Like all other religious terms without exception, the term 
charismata can mislead, perhaps by evoking some absurd 
imagery of kindly spells cast by personages muffled in priestly 
robes. The simplest is to go back to the etymology. Charisma 
means gift, a gift of love which itself is gift. 

It is in gift, that is to say in grace, that there assuredly lies the 
only principle capable of breaking, I will not say the world of 
the techniques in so far as they are admirable means to be used 
for the good of all, but those superstructures which threaten in 
the long run to stifle their beneficent power, because they are 
ordpdned to the triumph of pride which ultimately encompasses 
the destruction of the proud. 


20 








THE NOTION OF SPIRITUAL HERITAGE 


I THINK that I can never forget the more than physical 
horror and anxiety I experienced in walking among the ruins 
of inner Vienna in 1946, or more recently in Caen, Rouen or 
Wurzburg. Among these ruins, how could I help evoking that 
spiritual heritage on which it seemed that human blindness had 
inflicted such irreparable damage? What concerns us here is 
not so much the physical destruction of so many irreplaceable 
monuments of an honourable past but the state of mind from 
which that destruction is inseparable. Not that this state of 
mind can be claimed to be the cause of the destruction—we 
should in any case in this field beware of causal interpretations. 
But what is undeniably true is that the destruction presupposed 
a technical development which, at least indirectly but none the 
less most effectively, helped to weaken or even to eliminate 
those feelings of gratitude and veneration without which those 
monuments could not lastingly be preserved. To tell the truth, 
I don’t quite know what term will cover this state of mind. At 
the bottom of it is a growing impatience with what tend 
increasingly to be regarded as obstacles to the advent of a new 
world, even of a renewed humanity. Let us see what the 
philosopher Gerschenson says in his Correspondence with V. 
Ivanov: 

Recently I have felt that all the intellectual acquisitions of man¬ 
kind, all its wealth of thought, knowledge, treasures accumulated 
through the centuries, are as intolerable as a yoke, they are like 
clothes which are too heavy, I feel stifled in them. ... I say to my¬ 
self‘What happiness it would be to dive into Lethe, to wash off from 
my' soul the memory of all these religions, philosophies, of all this 
knowledge, art, poetry—what joy it would be to come out on the 
other side as naked, light, buoyant as the first man, and to stretch 
out and raise my arms, without a memory of the past except the 
crushing weight of all these clothes and the delight of having shed 
them.’ Perhaps we were at ease in our resplendent robes, so long as 
they were newly made to measure and intact. But now that they 
have got so torn in the course of all these years, now that they 


21 


The Decline of Wisdom 

hang on us in tatters, I would like to tear them off once and for all 
and to fling them away. 

On a lower plane, I recall another instance of what I mean: 
an American officer in a town in Burgundy which had virtually 
been destroyed, saying to a young friend of mine: ‘You should 
be grateful to us for bombing all this old stuff. Now you can 
have a clean new town.’ 

There is a growing number of people who no longer recognise 
their heritage or, rather, who refuse it like a legacy to which 
burdensome obligations are attached. I remember a young 
communist Negro furiously attacking an ethnologist who had 
praised African civilisation. He felt that this praise was some¬ 
how intended to fetter him to his traditions, which he was on 
the contrary longing to shake off like a hateful yoke. 

Note that this change in outlook is undoubtedly connected 
with the growing prestige of youth as such and the discrediting 
of old age. The old are increasingly regarded as good for noth¬ 
ing, and this after ail is simply a corollary of the fact that, 
generally speaking, output is considered more and more to be 
the only valid criterion of human value. In South America I 
was very much struck, even in such countries as Brazil and 
Peru, with the brutally lighthearted way in which venerable 
edifices were pulled down to make room for huge characterless 
buildings that could never house a human presence; they were 
nothing but tenements meant to hold the largest possible 
number of individuals a nd offices piled on top of one another. 

All this obviously is true. Nevertheless logically we have no 
right to go straight on from these observations to a judgment of 
value. We cannot know a priori , that is to say, without a careful 
analysis, whether we are not faced, in reality, with a widespread 
aberration. That it is widespread proves nothing either way; 
a disease does not stop being a disease because it has grown 
into an epidemic, quite the contrary. The philosopher is thus 
bound to reflect upon these things and in the first place to ask 
himself what exact meaning can be given to the concept of 
spiritual heritage. 

The first question which might be asked is whether these two 


22 











The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

words are not contradictory. Is not a heritage necessarily 
something objective, a possession handed on from generation 
to generation? And is not spirit inspiration and creation? This 
objection is not merely formal: could it not be reasonably 
claimed that what is handed on is always a thing, or at most a 
sign which, in itself, still belongs to the world of things ?—while 
it is the part of the spirit to be always new, always reborn, 
and always to ascend from the sign to the reality signified 
which itself can never be passed on but must always be 
rediscovered. 

Let us see if this argument, impressive as it is, in reality 
deserves to be retained. It is natural to turn in the first place to 
the arts. Can a picture or a symphony which has come down 
to us from Rembrandt or Beethoven be described as a material 
system of signs? This seems to me a confusion. A system of 
signs is for instance an alphabet or a code, and if we have 
inherited such a thing we have to find out what the letters or 
the figures stand for. There is any number of possible keys. The 
unity of the system is arbitrary: it is purely arbitrarily that to 
this or that visual symbol this or that sound has been made to 
correspond. But there is nothing of this kind about a work of 
art. Its unity, which is by no means arbitrary, has to be grasped 
by a process of living sympathy. 

Besides, the notion of handing on has itself to be understood 
more deeply, for we nearly always tend to reduce it to its 
simplest terms, which are, it seems, tactile. Somebody holds 
something in his hand and passes it on to me so that I should 
hold it in his place: as in the torch race described by Lucretius. 
But the moment we have left this tactile field everything is much 
more complicated. Think, for instance, of teaching a song to a 
small child: this means teaching him to sing it in his turn. Even 
in so simple a case as this we have to admit that the difference 
between transmitting spiritually and materially blurs and 
begins to vanish. This is still more obvious if we think for in¬ 
stance of parents handing on to their children some particular 
way of thinking or believing, say their notion of honour. It is 
true that there is always some material support for such 
transmission; or rather, at a pinch the transmission could be 


The Decline of Wisdom 

identified with the part played by the support, but only if we 
recognise that it has as its complement something which is quite 
different and which has no meaning except on the spiritual 
plane. 

I have not, by the way, given any definition of the word 
spirit, I have in mind the concensus whic h expresses itself in 
the common usage rather than in any strictly definable notion. 

Thus, what our analysis seems to show is that the notion of 
handing on is here completely inadequate, and that where 
spiritual realities are concerned we cannot think simply in 
terms of a perpetuated possession , seen as an object which is 
handed on from one to another. This, actually, is confirmed 
by the most current experience, I remember my parents 
telling me how, one day when they were looking at the admir¬ 
able porch of the Cathedral of Alengon. two local women 
stopped in amazement to see them in contemplation of a 
monument which for them had doubtless only the value of its 
usefulness. 

We could say, I think, that on the one hand, it is only possible 
to speak of spiritual heritage where there persists an awareness 
of such a heritage, and on the other, that this awareness can 
only survive in a certain climate of diffuse gratitude. I stress 
this word. As I was preparing this book, 1 came to attach an 
ever increasing importance to this disposition, while at the same 
time recognising that it seems to be in some sort waning in the 
world of today. But I think that a phenomeno-logical analysis 
must be attempted before we can go on with our inquiry. 

One observation to begin with: everything seems to show 
that gratitude and admiration tend to lessen in the measure 
that creative power weakens. And let us add that as this power 
withdraws it is replaced by its toxic and deceptive substitute, 
the claim to innovate, and by the vanity that goes with it. The 
self styled innovator is centred upon himself, that is why he is 
so often unwilling to admire or to be grateful; no doubt he 
feels that one way or another he risks being diminished or 
humiliated, whereas the creator as such docs not think of 
himself, is not occupied with himself. You could say that the 
creative act as such is essentially ingenuous, even if afterwards 


23 


24 













The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

the artist looking at his work admires himself and feels that 
there is nobody to compare with him. 

The gratitude we are particularly concerned with here 
implies in its subject an intense awareness of his own receptivity 
and is thereby referred wholly to the other as the source of the 
benefit received. I have intentionally used the concrete word 
source rather than cause. The assertion immanent in gratitude 
bears on the gift I have received and is directed to the one from 
whom I have received it. The simplest case, and the easiest to 
analyse, is where I know my benefactor by name. Should we 
say, in the terms of a Spinozist psychology, that gratitude is a 
satisfaction linked with the idea of a given person regarded as 
cause? But as I have implied above, the term cause is here 
utterly unsuitable. Besides, this decomposition betrays the 
concrete reality we are seeking to understand. What w.e need 
to know is the nature of the link. And we should add that it is 
a link winch unites my benefactor and myself and that of this 
union the gift is the means. I prefer the word union to relation 
because, as was seen by Bradley, the feeling always transcends 
the relation to which it may be tempting to reduce it. 

But is it enough to say that gratitude is a feeling? Does this 
not make of it simply a state of consciousness or perhaps a 
habit induced by training? This would be to strip it of its 
purposiveness and to ignore its proper function in the economy 
of the spirit. It is clear to my mind that gratitude, even where 
it can hardly show itself materially at all—perhaps only in a 
gesture or a smile—is a sort of mysterious restitution, a restitu¬ 
tion in spirit. Not only is it a response, still more deeply is it 
an aspiration to respond more and more intimately; and to 
respond is of course essentially to recognise. The ambiguity of the 
French word reconnaissance (both ‘gratitude’ and ‘recognition’) 
is helpful in this respect. It could also be said that gratitude is 
rooted in generosity: those are mean souls who are, as it were, 
mortified by a gift, as though they felt it was a chain to fetter 
them. 

But it must be added that gratitude is not only in the moment , it 
is lasting, and this is what is meant when it is called a habit. 
In that sense it is based on memory, it is memory. But it is 

25 



G 


The Decline of Wisdom 

memory which is not simply a preservative, rather is it wake¬ 
fulness, a vigilance of the soul attentive not to lose what it 
regards as of lasting value. Perhaps the accent will be rightly 
placed if we remember that this wakefulness is an active 
struggle against the inward forces of dispersal, let us even say 
of distraction. The German word Zjerstreutheit has both mean¬ 
ings. This is where we may see the deep affinity between 
memory and faithfulness. Forgetting is a lapse of faithfulness. 
But let it always be recalled that faithfulness is active, it is the 
opposite of inertia. 

Not of course that there is any question of denying the 
physiological foundation of this activity. But if it is indeed a 
virtue it is so in so far as it is an inward disposition, firmly 
maintained whatever the gaps in what I would call mnemonic 
tissue. And virtue should here be taken in its strict sense—in the 
sense of virtus and as implying courage as opposed to slackness 
of whatever kind. 

All this remains true, if less visibly, when the gratitude is 
diffused because the giver cannot easily be identified. And 
there is also the intermediate case of a person receiving a gift 
without knowing from whom it comes. In a well-born soul 
gratitude is not abolished by this ignorance. All you can say is 
that the recipient will feel the need of discovering his benefactor. 

But clearly, when we are speaking of a spiritual heritage we 
are faced with realities which are much less easy to encompass. 
Nevertheless, thinking in a concrete way it will be possible to 
find landmarks in experience. In comparing some of the towns 
in America with the towns of old Europe I spoke of the need to 
distinguish carefully between a city and what is nothing but 
an agglomeration and I mentioned that in the one case there 
is presence while in the other there is none. That presence, or 
that climate, is manifestly a survival of the past, a survival 
which ensures the participation of the living in—what? As 
always when we come to the idea of participation it is difficult to 
designate the participated reality by an exact term. I do not 
think that this difficulty is fortuitous; for in a general way the 
act of designating bears on objects—on this thing or that; but 
in this case it is not an object or a thing we are concerned 

26 











The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

with but rather a life which is in some sense supra-personal. 

Let us pause a moment to see what exactly is the meaning of 
the word supra-personal. Nothing is more common or more 
unfortunate than the habit, which for clearly discernible 
reasons is growing, of confusing the infra- and the supra- 
personal. The mass—and all that pertains to the domain of the 
mass—is infra-personal. My friend Gustave Thibon has 
observed with justice that atomisation and collectivisation are 
two sides of the same and indivisible process which could be 
described both as devitalising and as de-spiritualising. On a 
level which is certainly not biological there is probably identity 
between life and spirit. But the paths we have followed con¬ 
verge on this important fact that it is only where there exists 
a concrete and organic unity—and not a piling up or an 
accumulation—that we shall find ourselves in the presence of 
the supra-personal, and also that only there does it become 
possible to speak of a spiritual heritage in the sense we are 
trying to define. The man of the agglomerations is in the deepest 
sense of the word a man without a heritage and from whom no- 
one will inherit anything. I am tempted to say that the element 
in which he subsists is that of non-gratitude—let us not say 
ingratitude because that would presuppose a gift, a kindness 
which remains unrecognised, and here, it is truly the kindness 
that has disappeared. This is true in every possible sense: it is 
enough to think of the materially unworthy conditions—the 
slum, the tenement—in which the proletariat as such exists. 
What has replaced the gift is the always partial, always in¬ 
adequate satisfaction of a claim which the claimant feels to be 
profoundly just and also no doubt unlimited. But this world of 
claims is a world where grace, in the most general sense, is 
profoundly unthinkable, as it is indeed in a universe which is 
mechanised and subject to the implacable necessity which rules 
over the machine. 

But between grace and gratitude there exists an intimate 
connection. This is expressed in the French action de grace . 
It could be said that the gift as such is inseparable from its 
recognition, and so true is this that the recognition itself can 
in a sense be described as gift. This is what makes it possible to 

27 


The Decline of Wisdom 

regard a being who has not the power of recognition, of 
gratitude, as a being who is disinherited. 

All this helps us to see the vast scale of the problem we are 
dealing with. But it would be well to have a clearer notion of 
the nature and the confines of that heritage, and also to ask 
ourselves to whom is addressed that diffuse gratitude of which 
I spoke. 

The answer to this may at first look simple. Is it not gratitude 
to our forebears or, if you prefer, to the anonymous multitude 
of those who have built up the civilisation we enjoy? The 
commonplace vagueness of this reply makes it suspect. Note to 
begin with that the term ‘civilisation’ which I have just used here 
for the first time covers a reality which is strangely hybrid 
and which cannot be described as spiritual unless the word is 
used in the vaguest sense. It is true that we have already 
mentioned how difficult it is in this domain to establish an 
exact frontier between the material and the spiritual. It would 
be safer to say that if such a division is possible it bears not so 
much on the contents as on the way of living a reality which 
itself belongs to both the visible and the invisible worlds. Let 
us further recall the distinction we made earlier between the 
infra- and the supra-personal. Surely the idea of a nameless 
multitude throws us back into the infra-personal, and what is 
infra-personal cannot, by definition, either inspire or feel 
gratitude. It could be shown at this point that personality itself, 
as it develops, following its upward rhythm, reaches towards 
the supra-personal, while if it withers or disintegrates, it falls 
into the infra-personal. All this amounts to saying that we 
cannot do with any sort of composite picture or classification; 
what we need is, on the contrary, to become conscious of a 
dynamic which is the very life of the spirit. 

In the light of this observation and of those we made earlier, 
it may be possible to re-vitalise, as it were, that notion of 
spiritual heritage which, unless these precautions are taken, is 
in danger of hardening, of sclerosis—as happens whenever 
thought is shut in by the categories of having. 

None of this is difficult to grasp if we think of the kind of 
gratitude we feel before the work of some great artist who still \ 







The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

o 

nourishes our inward life. It may well happen to us in such a 
case to see the artist as a mediator between ourselves and a r ^ 
world which is not of his own making, but which it has been ™ 
given to him to discover. Once again we come upon the 
distinction, which I believe to be fundamental, between 
creation and production: it would be difficult to speak of 
mediation in the case of something manufactured or produced. 

The issue may be confused for us by the fact that the artist, 
in the course of his earthly life, has gone through trials of such . 1, 
a kind as to arouse our pity or admiration. But this is not f 
invariably the case; sometimes on the contrary the work seems 
only to have come into being at the cost of the artist as a man 
and of his human virtues. Thus our gratitude seems really % 
to go not to the man as such but to the spirit which became 
embodied in him, even though such an incarnation presupposes * J * 
a sort of active self-effacement on his part, for which he should * ' 
be given credit. This is an illustration of what was said of the 
relation between the personal and the supra-personal. * 

If the example of the artist taken individually is particularly 
clear, we must also see that here again there can be no true * 
demarcation and that a kind of mysterious communication 
seems to take place between the works of different artists, 
however original each one is in itself. 

Thus we are led to the idea that, however you consider it, a 
spiritual heritage seems to be a kind of mediation. But I will 
add at once that this mediation is itself mediated. What should 
we understand by this obscure expression? It means that the 
heritage we speak of is not only an intermediary between 
ourselves and the spirit, whatever metaphysical definition we 
give the term, but that we can only recognise that heritage for 
what it is in the light of that Idea to which alone it owes its 
value and its dignity. This explains why it is that the more the 
notion of spirit ebbs from human consciousness the more the 
idea of such a heritage tends to become obliterated. And this 
obliteration in its turn shows itself in the progress of impiety, 
taking this word in a sense completely independent of con¬ 
fessional religion of any sort. Piety is the feeling for what is 
holy. And what is holy is inviolable. And the inviolable stands 

29 


The Decline of Wisdom 

in the way of force itself, force has no hold over it. It seems to 
me particularly important to see that we are here in a dimension 
which has nothing to do with history as it is commonly under¬ 
stood since Hegel. Not that Hegel, at any rate in his early 
work, lacked the notion of spiritual heritage: on the contrary, 
he had it in a very high degree. But I think that, through its 
inward slant, his thought was to tend in fact towards a muti¬ 
lated philosophy, a philosophy which, though continuing to be 
inspired by him superficially, was to be turned by his followers 
against the basic tenets of his early doctrine. I am not sure that 
this contradiction or regression is not implied in the very notion 
of objectivity as it works itself out in a philosophy based on the 
dialectic of the Master and the Slave. To understand this it is 
enough to compare almost any text inspired by this dialectic 
with a text, say, by Peguy. I am thinking especially of his 
admirable pages on the Supplicants; but in general, the 
importance from my own standpoint of his critique of the 
modern conception of history could hardly be over-emphasised. 

At the touch of a science of history which is no longer any¬ 
thing but a lifeless piling up of documents, ‘the real event’, says 
Peguy, ‘becomes a historical event, it turns to cinders. The 
temporal world does not wait for the eternal kingdom to fall 
to ashes’. 1 ‘History’, he also says, ‘is that long railway line 
running along the coast. But it does not follow the coast itself, 
it does not coincide with the coast itself, for upon the coast 
there are tides and men and fishes and the mouths of streams 
and rivers and the double life of earth and sea.’ 2 The historic 
sciences become a huge refrigerating plant. . . . And let 
us also say that history understood in this way is the story of 
irremediable ageing, for the only remedy to old age is the 
rejuvenating action of grace and this action is totally un¬ 
suspected by the historian. How foolish it then becomes to 
believe in the justice of history and to appeal to its tribunal! 
Yet ‘it is into the senile hands of Clio that the historians of our 
time would place not only the government of the world but 
spiritual government as well, and the ordering of what is not 
of the world’. 3 

1 Quoted by Delaporte, I, p. 119. 2 Clio , p. 248. 3 Clio , p. 190. 


30 









The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

If we join the profound intuitions of Peguy with our own 
analyses we shall see that the notion of spiritual heritage 
empties itself of meaning in the exact measure that history 
grows debilitated, degenerates into the piling up of information 
and ‘becomes inscription in place of memory’. Gradually all 
value ebbs from it as a science. If man is to remain in living 
contact with the past it must be in a dimension other than that 
in which historians confine themselves to the collecting of their 
documents. 

Does this mean that documentation as such is useless or 
harmful? Obviously, that would be absurd. But the truth is 
that this work, indispensable in itself, must be kept alive by an 
inward disposition which alone can give it meaning and virtue. 
And the danger is great that the work, in the long run, may 
stifle the disposition which alone can justify it; while it is only 
too understandable that in the face of the mountains of his¬ 
torical rubble there arises a sort of nihilistic protest, the protest 
of the new man clamouring to be rid of the burden of the past. 
To this Ivanov justly replies that to believe in the possibility of 
reverting to the state of the primitive is an illusion, ‘a betrayal, 
a forgetting, an escape, a cowardly reaction which comes from 
weariness ... the road to the simplicity so dearly loved and so 
greatly desired must pass through complexity’. 1 

Perhaps we shall see further into this most difficult problem 
if we examine the connection between spiritual heritage and 
values properly so called: can we reasonably say that values are 
themselves inherited? We could also ask this: are we sure that 
values can be preserved even after we have liberated ourselves 
from the notion of a spiritual heritage? And can such a libera¬ 
tion be effective or is it an illusion? 

Clearly to attempt to answer these questions we must tackle 
once again the notion of value and find out what use can be 
made of it. For it must be admitted that there has grown up a 
scholastic of values just as there was once a scholastic of being, 
and that by now the more is said about it the less is understood. 
I suggested in my last book (Men against Humanity) that the 
error lay in trying to carry over into the domain of essence and 

1 Correspondence , pp. 144-5. 

31 


The Decline of Wisdom 

being a notion which really belongs to the empirical and 
economic cycle of production, distribution and consumption. 
How could such a transposition help us to account for the 
search for truth, for instance, or the practice of the good, or 
aesthetic creativity? Was it possible, I wondered, that the 
notion of value in philosophy had followed upon a sort of 
devaluation of reality itself? If this were so, then we ought 
surely to go back to where Nietzsche started from, and retrieve 
the ontological element which he tried to reduce to terms of 
value and to express in terms of will. 

Can these observations help us to answer the questions we 
asked earlier? 

Note firstly that they link up with what was said of gratitude 
and could be said of veneration. We are evidently outside the 
circle, not of a philosophy of values as such, but of a voluntarist 
philosophy of values, and I am not thinking only of Nietzsche 
but at least as much of a contemporary thinker such as Sartre 
who must indeed be considered in some respects as a degenerate 
disciple of Nietzsche. In his work is to be found the notion that 
values are literally creat'd by the one who holds them; freedom 
pre-exists.values, and this in fact is the only meaning that can be 
given to his famous dictum: ‘existence precedes essence’. 

Clearly, if Sartre is right, then we have to say that there is no 
spiritual heritage and also that values exist altogether in¬ 
dependently of that non-existent heritage; though it would 
remain to be seen of what use they are in such a system. 

My own outlook is the exact opposite of this, and nothing 
makes it clearer than the relationship between gratitude and 
grace. To put freedom at the beginning is deliberately to 
ignore the reality of gift; it amounts, in fact, to replacing the 
point of view of creation by the point of view of production. 
It also means stripping what are still called values of all possible 
universality. It is curious to note that in one of its aspects 
Sartrian thought tends towards solipsism—but only in one 
aspect, for there are others by which it is drawn to Marxism 
and materialism. This pull is characteristic; it can hardly be 
permanent for it prevents all equilibrium. 

But what becomes of the notion of value in such an outlook 


32 










The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

as mine, that is to say, in a metaphysic whose axis is gratitude 
and the consciousness of the sacred? 

To begin with, I stand very firmly by what I said in Homo 
Viator : value can only be incarnate; the moment we disembody 
it while trying to make it objective, we distort it and we strip 
it of its authenticity. 

Does this mean that all values are in a sense historic and 
cannot be taken out of the context of their time ? Should we say 
for instance that for us, now, the good can only be defined in 
terms of the world situation of today? Such a statement would 
be dangerously ambiguous and might falsify the notion of 
incarnation. Is it not more true to say that there is always and 
necessarily a tension between the individuality of the circum¬ 
stances and the universality of the law? In regard to value, that 
tension seems indeed to be the crux, the spring, for we must turn 
away both from the formalism which denies history and from 
pure relativism which incidentally is self-contradictory since 
it tends to make history into an absolute. 

We must admit however that the idea of such a tension is 
abstract and equivocal. How far can we make it concrete? It 
would seem necessary to refer it to the subject that I am. But 
here too there is a danger: on the one hand I might be tempted 
to cut 01Tthis subject from its roots in history; and on the other, 
if I put it back upon its family tree, do I not withdraw from it 
its value as subject, depriving it of its power of initiative and 
turning it into a mere link in an endless chain? Once again, 
the pitfalls are those of objectivity; and it is at this point that 
we must go back once more to the notion of spiritual heritage. 
For from the only philosophic standpoint which seems to me 
valid, that of reflection or meditation, I see myself as the heir: 
only we must keep in mind that, as we said earlier, the heritage 
is a reiterated call rather than a possession which is handed on. 
And here again we must be careful lest we should ignore the 
inextricable complexity of real situations. What reaches me is 
not a single call; rather, I have to make a choice between calls 
which are discordant and some of which are temptations: and 
it may be that my freedom will consist chiefly in recognising the 
temptations for what they are. But the axis of this choice is that 

33 


The Decline of Wisdom 

of my very being in as much as this is not a given nature but a 
creative aspiration: once again we come upon the inexhaustible 
formula: become that which thou art. 

But we cannot stop at this without falling into pure romanti¬ 
cism, and this itself can be a temptation. I would feel that I 
sinned against the truth if I did not point out what are, after 
all, the grave objections which in the present world situation 
can be raised against this concept, however satisfying it may be 
to the mind. As one of the heirs I have the duty to see that world 
situation not only from my own standpoint but from that of the 
countless multitude of the disinherited who are all around me, 
and this obligation is certainly not one of the least pressing of 
the calls that reach me. My first duty is to reject the lie that 
after all the disinherited are also heirs. The truth is rather that 
to be heirs they must first be human beings, and to be a human 
being means not only to possess the biological characteristics 
of a given species but to live in a human way; for all appear¬ 
ances to the contrary, these words have a perfectly precise 
meaning, at any rate in a philosophy of the spirit. To live 
humanly means to live in such material conditions that the 
human being is not crushed under the weight of care, and that 
his consciousness is able to develop an awareness of both self 
and other—and also of a reality which transcends the opposition 
between the two. These conditions relate to the satisfaction of 
basic needs—food, housing and the rest. . . . Here Marxism is 
right lo denounce the mystifying tactics employed by those who 
bring in spiritual considerations inopportunely in order to veil 
realities which they have not the strength or the courage to 
face in their nakedness. And this uncovers an immense problem 
of which it is indeed hard to find the positive solution: how shall 
the heirs so transform the world of the disinherited that they in 
turn may share in the spiritual heritage? The extraordinary 
difficulty of the problem lies in that we, the heirs, appear from a 
certain point of view as allies of an economic system of which it 
may be asked whether it does not pre-suppose that world of the 
disinherited. Hence we ought carefully to examine what may 
be the nature of that alliance. For it is easily enough mis¬ 
conceived, and here the objection to the claims of Marxism as 


34 











The Notion of Spiritual Heritage 

a philosophy, as a Weltanschauung , in the domain of religion 
as in that of aesthetic values is insurmountable. 

To say for instance that at a given level of poverty and 
exploitation there is a danger of religion being used by the 
exploiters as an additional means of pressure is to recognise a 
fact of which unhappily instances arc not lacking; but to go 
from this to conclusions bearing upon the essence of religion 
itself is radically illegitimate. The Christian has simply to 
declare that by reason of human weakness it is always possible 
to pervert that essence but without real injury to the content of 
faith. But it must also be added that unfortunately on the 
existential plane there is always danger of this confusion arising 
and that in this sense a bad priest is literally a false witness who 
betrays r ;t and contributes by his example to the spreading 
of distrust and hate in place of love and faith. 

It should be observed that in the light of the notions of 
testimony and creative attestation the notion of spiritual 
heritage which I have attempted to analyse in the first part of 
this essay is, as it were, raised and transfigured. But on this 
ground even more than on any other, it is clear that there can 
be no question of imagining anything that bears the slightest 
likeness to the handing on of property. Perhaps we should turn 
at this point to the idea of development so profoundly elaborated 
by Cardinal Newman: 

This process is called the development of an idea, being the 
germination, growth and perfection of some living, that is, influential 
truth, or apparent truth, in the minds of men during a sufficient 
period. ... It grows when it incorporates, and its purity consists, 
not in isolation but in its continuity and sovereignty . 1 

Though it remains to be seen what is the exact meaning given 
here to the word idea. 

The stronger and more living an idea, that is, the more powerful 
hold it exercises on the minds of men, the more able is it to dispense 
with safeguards and trust itself against the danger of corruption . 2 

But such a statement presupposes a veritable transcendence of 
the idea even if it is not understood in a strictly Platonic sense. 

1 Development of Christian Doctrine , Section I. 2 Loc. cit., Section III, 5. 

35 


The Decline of Wisdom 

What is in any case out of the question is a psychologism of any 
sort or an essentially positivist sociology. But this clearly 
brings us back to what was said earlier about values, and I 
think that we come again upon a notion on which I have 
insisted a good deal in my recent writings: that to account for 
essence we should draw on a philosophy of light or of the light¬ 
giving (des Erhellendes) . Essence or value—in this perspective 
the two tend to coincide—appear as a modality ( Weise) of the 
light-giving principle rather than as an immaterial content 
which is illuminated. I am not unaware of the abstruseness of 
this statement, nevertheless I think that it usefully reflects on 
the notion of spiritual heritage. For at the end of these con¬ 
verging analyses it is to be seen more clearly than ever that 
the opposition of subject and object is not only barren but dis¬ 
torting. To understand this we need only recall that it is only 
by an abstraction that the gift can be separated from the way 
in which it is accepted, acknowledged and made into an object 
of gratitude. 

In concluding, I should like to insist once more on the fact 
that a rigid and self-enclosed traditionalism involves a double 
failing: a failing against truth and a failing against charity. 
Here if anywhere, we should keep in mind the distinction 
between the open and the closed made by Bergson in his last 
writings. Let us simply say that the notion of a spiritual heritage 
depends on an open way of thinking, and that thought can only 
remain open if it is spurred on, as it were, by concern for the 
disinherited and above all by the refusal to conceive of their state 
of indigence as permanently unavoidable, when not only for 
the Christian but for any religious consciousness whatsoever, it 
can only represent the ceaseless appeal of the spirit to every 
man’s good will. 


36 

















THE BREAKING UP OF THE NOTION OF 

WISDOM 

I T was in 1951, in South America where I had to speak on 
the role of the philosopher in the modern world, that I found 
I was questioning myself about the notion of wisdom—not so 
much about its contents as about its chances of manifestation 
in this world of today. Anticipating my conclusions, let me 
say at once that I believe these chances to be waning, or more 
exactly, that wisdom, taken in that sense of mediation which 
belonged to it throughout past ages, seems to be under such 
pressure that it is in danger, literally, of breaking up, of being 
dislocated. There has grown up on the one hand a whole 
system of technical knowledge aimed at the ordering of the 
world and of human life as a set of purely natural processes; 
while on the other, we see the growth of ascetic disciplines 
strongly influenced by Eastern thought—the oddest aspect of 
this is that it takes place at a moment when that way of thinking 
tends to desert the countries of its origin. It is true that here the 
terms are not properly fixed and that there is a readiness to talk 
glibly of the sages of India. To avoid confusion let us note to 
begin with that there is a fundamental difference between 
wisdom of the profane kind, such as the thought of Confucius 
or Epicurus, of Montaigne or of Goethe, and those disciplines 
by which the soul trains itself to overcome the world and its 
illusions. This, however, is no more than a preliminary dis¬ 
tinction and though I think we should establish it in principle 
it will certainly not make it possible for us to attach a neat 
label to every case; we shall have to beware of this particularly 
when we talk of Christian wisdom. What I should like to try to 
show is that wisdom, in the traditional and profane sense of the 
word, used to occupy a sort of central zone, a sort of middle 
(milieu), whence it seems now called upon to withdraw—and in 
so doing it cannot but change its nature—while this central 
zone itself becomes nothing but an empty space, a space liter¬ 
ally untenanted. It is this emptying that I should like to study. 

37 


The Decline of Wisdom 

As always, we must be careful not to be misled by metaphors. 
The spatial image middle can be usefully replaced by measure, 
and instead of saying that the middle space is disused we can 
say that measure is depreciated, it is no longer regarded as a 
value. I think that we should not be mistaken in saying that 
the ne quid nimis has been a constant of universal wisdom, and 
I will add that, reciprocally, the moment an excess—even an 
excess in the order of purity—is regarded as a good, we are 
outside wisdom properly so called (it being understood that we 
are still speaking of profane wisdom). I admit that this is not 
really a definition, but in the interests of clarity I will keep to 
it in what follows. 

Let us ask ourselves in the first place what are the conditions 
and the ways by which the mind may be led to give to measure 
as such a value which is properly spiritual. But perhaps we 
should start by qualifying. Moderation, which is after all to 
some extent the same as measure, may be counselled in the 
interests of bodily health. In that case it is the dietician who 
speaks, he allows the use of alcohol or tobacco in moderation, 
etc. ... He will say perhaps that the moderate use of tobacco 
or alcohol cannot do much harm, and that complete abstention 
might even be bad for a patient who is in the habit of smoking 
or drinking. But note this: the dietician speaks in the name 
of a kind of wisdom of the body. He may of course forbid the use 
of stimulants altogether, because of some special predisposition 
or a particular danger threatening his client. All the same, this 
idea of a wisdom of the body should make us think: how is it 
conceivable? Perhaps only to the extent that the body is 
likened to a mind in infancy, a mind which is still in need of 
tutelage? Dietetics would then be a sort of education of the 
body, combining firmness and flexibility. Let us go on to 
medicine. Clearly at this level the basic notion is that of an 
equilibrium to be discovered and maintained, an equilibrium 
which is living and cannot therefore be set up once and for all 
but has to be restored from moment to moment in relation to 
conditions which are constantly changing. For this continual 
changing of conditions is not accidental but, on the contrary, 
inherent in the very structure of life. It is surely only by a 

38 







The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

faulty abstraction that we have grown accustomed to thinking 
of life as something on its own, apart from the conditions to 
which it must adapt itself. This is very important to our dis¬ 
cussion. Even on the level of the body and of organic life these 
elementary truths can be lost to sight, and this undoubtedly 
happens whenever the organism is thought of as a machine, or 
rather, whenever the self-regulating power which belongs to the 
individual organism comes to be ignored. This mistake is 
carefully avoided by those doctors who, without falling into the 
wrong sort of quietism, believe that nature should be left to do 
its work, or rather that the use of medicines is to assist it: 
contrast this with the pride of the scientist who ignores the need 
for this kind of fundamental humility in the presence of the 
silent work of life. 

We can go on from here to the field of ethics the more easily 
because wisdom can be seen from this point of view as a sort of 
moral dietetics. Even where the issue is physical health the 
advice of the dietician can be neglected or refused: ‘You 
want m<V to give up my pleasures? Why should I? I do not care 
to prolong my life if I am to be deprived of everything that 
makes it livable. 5 In a world which respects wisdom, the answer 
is that there exists a hierarchy of ways of living, and that a man 
who has to give up his coffee or his whisky should be able to 
discover ‘higher satisfactions 5 which should give a truer mean¬ 
ing to his life. It can also be said that on the social plane the 
individual has a duty to bring his conduct into harmony with 
the requirements of the natural group such as the family. This 
would be the moment to show how it is that these arguments for 
all their reasonableness and perennial validity tend in given 
circumstances to lose their ‘existential weight 5 , but we must 
first bring out in a more concrete way the implications of 
the notion of wisdom, and see in what circumstances it can 
predominate. 

Let us note firstly that here the relation of dietician to 
client becomes interiorised: wisdom cannot be anything but an 
auto-dietetic, though this must be clearly distinguished from 
the Kantian autonomy which belongs to quite a different 
spiritual dimension. The sage is a man who has achieved a 


39 


The Decline of Wisdom 

certain mastery over himself. But I must emphasise two points. 
I have said he has achieved it: it seems to me that there can be 
no wisdom which is not the fruit of a slowly developed maturity, 
and maturity presupposes patience and continuity. Note that 
patience and continuity are even more than closely linked: 
patience is continuity, it is, as it were, its visage. And I would 
say that at the root of wisdom there is a degree of patience 
towards oneself, which is the contrary of presumption. He who 
would obtain everything from himself and this immediately 
will never attain to wisdom. He may indeed attain sanctity, 
but for this he stands in need of grace, and nothing in the least 
like grace is allowed by wisdom, in so far as it is self-aware. 
Should we then say that it is the result of training ? Such a view 
would be not only superficial but contradictory, since a training 
of this sort, or if you like such a moral horticulture, already 
presupposes wisdom. If this is true we shall have to say that the 
passing of time is as necessary to wisdom as if it were organically 
part of it. Indeed, wisdom precludes the kind of instantaneity 
which used to be so fashionable among our contemporaries. 
Note that in the ages when it was respected wisdom was 
regarded as the prerogative of old age: and if respect for age 
has almost vanished in our day, this is undoubtedly connected 
with the devaluation suffered by wisdom itself. 

Let us observe in passing that wisdom, considered not from 
the outside but from the point of view of someone who is seeking 
it, can never be looked upon as acquired. If a man were to 
say of himself, ‘I am a sage 5 , he would at once make himself 
ridiculous. Is this because the sage is expected to be falsely, 
hypocritically, modest ? I do not think so, I think it is because 
we know that if wisdom became complacent, it would immedi¬ 
ately get stiff in the joints and in the end fall into decay. It does 
seem in the last analysis that, for the seeker, wisdom is in a 
sense indistinguishable from the pursuit of it. We shall have to 
see why it is that this pursuit is today generally held suspect; 
our further analysis will throw light on this. 

Let us consider firstly that, if not by right, at least in practice, 
in real life, the patience needed to attain wisdom goes perhaps 
not with leisure but certainly with a state that can be negatively 


40 

















The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

described as not-being-careworn. In an age more favourable to 
this pursuit than ours, not even the humblest artisan knew 
anything of the kind of care that obsesses the proletarian of 
today. Yet care, more than almost anything, makes for mentat 
discontinuity. It is true that syndicalism, in so far as it assures 
the worker of security, tends to lift from him the burden of 
care and thereby helps him to be once more capable of wisdom. 
But it must be added at once that this is only true in so far 
as it confines itself to the professional sphere, for if it does not, 
it suffers in a most harmful way from the repercussions of the 
world’s political unrest, and there, and for every reason in the 
world, there is no longer anything in the least like wisdom. 

It could also be said that wisdom implies a certain distance 
from events, though we would need to examine the nature of 
that distance, as also of patience which has a hidden connec¬ 
tion with it. The intrusion of politics into professional life seems 
to eliminate that distance, and this in a really degrading way 
since it is directed by the press, by propaganda and what have 
you. ... It is really a kind of manipulation of human beings in 
view of party aims. Yet it must also be remembered—and this 
is most important—that if a worker stays outside his pro¬ 
fessional organisations because he believes them to be tainted 
by politics and wishes to keep his independence, he risks falling 
back into the worst kind of insecurity, into the most anxious 
care, and of thus also being left in his own way at the despotic 
mercy of events. 

Almost the same thing could be said about the family in the 
modern world. It can hardly be denied that the family has 
been the nursery of a certain kind of secular wisdom, and that 
this wisdom is today falling to pieces. This is true both where 
the authority of the father is disappearing and where it is en¬ 
forced against the current in a world which is less and less 
inclined to grant it. And this brings us inevitably to the 
problem of the relations between wisdom and tradition. 

I have spoken of distance: is it not better to say detachment ? 
But here again we come up against difficulties. The detachment 
of the sage, as against that of the saint which is quite different, 
is always in danger of being tainted by pretentiousness and by 

4i 


D 


The Decline of Wisdom 

a slant towards contempt. It is very possible for the sage who 
practices detachment—a sort of Lucretian detachment for 
instance, the kind of the suave mari magno —to fall into betrayal, 
and this on the plane of wisdom itself. For after all the true 
function of the sage is surely the function of linking together, 
of bringing into harmony. I am not thinking only or even 
chiefly of the Greeks, but of classical China, of the China of 
Lao Tse, and what here strikes me in a really marvellous light 
is that the sage is truly linked with the universe. The texts are 
unmistakable and revealing: the order to be established in life 
—whether of the individual or of the city or of the empire—is 
in no way separable from the cosmic order. And perhaps in this 
connection we should give much greater importance than is 
commonly done to those forms of knowledge, such as geomancy, 
astrology and so on, which were so highly developed in China 
and in other Asiatic countries and which today are discredited 
to the point of the absurd. The important thing and I think 
it is hardly possible to insist on it too much—is that in this 
outlook the true aim of knowledge and of life is to be integrated 
in the universal order, and not at all to transform the world by 
bringing it into subjection to the human will, to man’s needs 
or his desires. The expression ‘practical anthropomorphism 
which I have used elsewhere is, I think, exactly fitting in this 
connection. This attitude, which is that of humanity today, is 
the exact opposite of the one that might be called cosmo- 
centrism and which implied a deep humility on the part of man. 
It is an extraordinary illusion to believe that because we have 
done away with geo-centrism or even helio-centrism in the 
field of astronomy or cosmography we have also finished with 
anthropocentrism. What has happened is merely that it has 
been carried over to a different field—that of action, and it is, 
almost certainly, precisely in this field that it can lead to the 

most tragic consequences. . , 

All this is not really a digression, quite the contrary. 1 think 
that wisdom in its greatest and most traditional sense has 
probably always consisted above all else in the will to exorcise 
that attitude of mind which is triumphantly manifested m 
what I have called practical anthropomorphism. 


42 






















The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

But to make it clearer we must examine the subtle relation¬ 
ship which exists between wisdom and reason. 

There is no doubt that we think of the sage as a reasonable 
man. But is the word ‘reasonable’ altogether unambiguous ? I 
do not think so. The reasonable man is perhaps fundamentally 
and above all else a man who perceives the limitations of 
reason. Let me recall what Chesterton wrote in Orthodoxy : a 
man who is insane is a man whose reason is without roots and 
functioning in a void. He adds that it is mystery that keeps the 
mind of man healthy: so long as you have mystery you have 
sanity, take away mystery and you fall into morbidity. Leaving 
aside this statement (though it seems to me profoundly true) 
what I think is evident is that reason in a reasonable man acts, 
as it were, as its own brake, and where this brake is lacking 
there can be no room for wisdom. 

Doubtless it could be objected that we must not be misled by 
the use of the word wisdom in the singular and that there are 
very different types and modes of wisdom. There is the wisdom 
which some might call earthy and which is closely linked with 
common sense, the wisdom of Moliere for instance; and at the 
opposite end of the scale there is a wisdom, such as that of the 
cynics, which on the contrary seems to despise common sense 
and to set it at naught. Between them is there a common 
denominator? I would prefer to put the question in dynamic 
terms. Whatis common is the direction, the magnet, and perhaps 
I should say that this is always grounded in the will to freedom. 
It could be said in a general way that wisdom is the appanage 
of the free, and also that what the sage is always looking for is 
authentic freedom. 

It is easier to define this freedom negatively than to bring 
out its positive attributes. The sage is in the first place one who 
has silenced his passions, or at least tamed, domesticated them; 
he is also independent of public opinion and prejudice and is 
able in all circumstances to resist the collective impulse. 
Perhaps we should also say that this independence gives him 
peace and, if the word still has meaning, happiness, so long as 
this is not confused with pleasure. Even the hedonists have had 
to establish a hierarchy of pleasure and thus in a sense to go 

43 


The Decline of Wisdom 

beyond it. But it is difficult to conceive the sage without a kind 
of harmonious equilibrium which he cannot but feel as happi¬ 
ness. The famous pages of Montaigne are in this connection of 
a significance and value which transcend their author: 

The soul in which philosophy dwells must, by its own health, give 
health to the body also. Its contentment, repose and ease must shine 
forth, and it must so mould the outward body to its own form that 
it endows it with a gracious pride, an active and alert bearing and a 
quick and merry countenance. The chief sign of wisdom is a constant 
rejoicing ( esjouissance ). Its state is like that of things above the moon: 
always serene. 

What is certain is that the notion of wisdom implies what 
might be called aristocratic values, this word being taken in 
an altogether general sense and in no way related to the idea of 
aristocracy as a class. What I mean is that there can be no 
wisdom without a recognition of a certain hierarchy of modes 
of living, without the prevalence of an idea of a better life, 
even if this is not referred to a religious or metaphysical 
absolute. But we must be careful not to jump to conclusions. 
There undoubtedly still exist democracies of a type which, at 
least provisionally, is compatible with the idea of the primacy 
of quality. This was certainly true of English democracy, at 
any rate until the First World War, though it is also true that 
it hung on the existence of an aristocracy regarded as ex¬ 
emplary. The notion, hard to analyse, of the gentleman as the 
exemplary type is of great significance. It could also be said 
(though much less clearly) of democracy in France, so long as 
it stood out, in whatever muddled and incoherent v/ay, against 
the drag of egalitarianism. The problem is still more compli¬ 
cated and confused in the federal democracies of Switzerland 
and the United States. But wherever egalitarianism prevails, 
rooted as it always is in envy and resentment, the sense of 
quality tends to vanish. It is indeed depressing but quite logical 
and understandable that we should witness almost everywhere 
a progressive devaluation of the activities of the mind in favour 
of manual work. Even craftsmanship, in so many ways linked 
with an activity which is properly artistic, is systematically 
discouraged. It seems to me very hard indeed to formulate a 


44 

















The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

positive principle which could be claimed to justify this 
devaluation; probably it has several and fairly varied roots. 
We will examine one of them further on. It is easy enough to 
agree that in the 19th century abuses of exactly the opposite 
sort were the rule, and that the conditions of the proletariat in 
the first decades of the Industrial Revolution were such that 
they remained a lasting shame to the society which was respon¬ 
sible for them. But it is no less certain that the reversal, inevit¬ 
able though perhaps it was, which has been taking place ever 
since, must result in the suppression, not only in practice but as 
of right, of anything having the remotest likeness to an aristoc¬ 
racy. For it is obvious that the One Party of a totalitarian 
regime has not the slightest bearing on it, it is not even a 
caricature of an aristocracy, it is its complete negation. 

Yet it may perhaps be asked, can we be sure that a kind of 
wisdom cannot subsist even when the sense of quality has almost 
vanished? This needs careful consideration: there is no doubt 
that there existed in the past and particularly in such countries 
as France and Italy a popular wisdom. But was this not bound 
up with a tradition of craft and family life and even more 
deeply with a continuity which itself is on the way to vanishing 
if it has not vanished already ? Here the role of environment is of 
great importance: even where there was nothing like the poetic 
and cosmic feeling prevalent in China for so many centuries, 
the individual was at least conscious of belonging to a deeply 
humanised environment. No one better than Peguy has shown 
the way in which intelligence and work were inter-related 
among the people; but his ‘people’ were essentially a people of 
craftsmen. Today this relationship is broken up and the world 
is in discord. What is very curious, incidentally, is that, for 
certain psycho-analytical reasons, the intellectual toadies to the 
people in exactly the measure in which his own thinking has 
become disembodied and floats about in a sort of indeterminate 
medium; I mention psycho-analysis because the intellectual 
suffers from an inferiority complex which is itself inseparable 
from a great pretentiousness: we are here in the field of 
ambivalence. But the people, flattered, indoctrinated, subjected 
to all kinds of propaganda, is doomed to lose the good sense 


45 


The Decline of Wisdom 

which was its appanage. The role of bad films cannot here be 
overlooked. Those who, by reason of their very poverty and 
of what was deeply real in their work and in their tastes, were 
genuinely and constantly in touch with what might be called 
the soil of existence, are today perverted by something that is 
certainly not culture but is rather its most harmful counterfeit. 

That popular wisdom to which philosophers worthy of the 
name have always paid tribute cannot really be separated 
from common sense; and the disappearance of common sense 
is a phenomenon of immeasurable gravity and one which must 
inevitably bring about a radical change in the climate of the 
mind. It is comparable to some great meteorological trans¬ 
formation such as now and then takes place, and mental 
meteorology is the name I would propose for this change which 
is too deep and too general to be readily discerned; so wide¬ 
spread is it indeed that no doubt it happens in every one of us— 
that is why it needs a sustained effort of concentration to 
become aware of it. 

With the disappearance of common sense it is likely that 
wisdom also is doomed to vanish, or at best to become the 
prerogative of the very few. Perhaps we might ask ourselves 
if at that point it does not change its nature in such a way as 
to become something approaching sanctity. We will come back 
to this important point. What I should like to stress now is 
that at bottom common sense is not so very different from 
wisdom. It is a kind of deposit left by wisdom: instead of 
drifting about it settles in the average human being, but only 
for so long as certain sociological conditions are maintained. 
The nature of these conditions is shown by the word ‘common’ 
itself. There is and there can be: no common sense where there 
is no common life or common notions, that is to say where 
there no longer exist any organic groups such as the family, the 
village, and so on. Yet the collectivisation we are witnessing 
in every field is happening at the cost or even in contempt of 
these organic groups. This may seem astonishing at first sight, 
but it is very obvious if we think about it. For we are confronted 
everywhere with enormous agglomerations which are increas¬ 
ingly mechanised, so that the individuals are linked in much 

46 










The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

the same way as the parts of a machine. This seems to me one 
of the most terrible effects of the predominance of the State. 
It could be said that the moment common sense goes out of 
institutions and civic relationships it is also driven from the 
human mind. There are countless examples of this: I am 
thinking especially of the burdening of teaching and school life 
by examination programmes which are often drawn up in 
defiance of common sense, so that the means of selection are 
made increasingly artificial and take less and less account of 
those human qualities which ought surely to be considered 
before all others. Another and very different instance is the fact 
that small enterprises, that is to say those which are on a really 
human scale, are systematically penalised in favour of enormous 
and dehumanised concerns. 1 Still another is the danger to such 
professions as medicine when they are run by functionaries. 

I wish only to draw attention to the inevitable effect of all 
this upon mental attitudes. I admit that it is difficult to judge 
with certainty of a process which is still developing. But in 
observing those around us it is hard not to conclude that, as I 
have tried to show elsewhere, the spirit of abstraction is gradu¬ 
ally taking hold of human beings and alienating them increas¬ 
ingly from the sense of life and living realities, while at the same 
time it makes of them a field which is dangerously favourable 
to the growth of totalitarian ideologies. 

It is clear as daylight that these ideologies are incompatible 
with our idea of wisdom, if only because they shut out all notion 
of measure and relativity, and without this notion they in¬ 
evitably drift into fanaticism: from the standpoint of wisdom— 
of any wisdom—fanaticism is literally madness. We have not 
yet spoken of tolerance and this is the moment to touch on it, 
for it is in this connection that the kind of regression that has 
been going on for half a century is perhaps most clear. It seems 
that it is not enough to say that tolerance is not practised: most 
people nowadays have not an idea of what it means. 

Here it is necessary to point out the dangerous equivocations 
contained in the fashionable expression: committed thought (pensee 
engagee). The confusion which is at the back of it has really 

1 This is perhaps^changing, as for instance in Germany. 

47 


The Decline of Wisdom 

disastrous results and can hardly be condemned too strongly. 

The champions of committed thought start from the notion, 
which is true, that man is a being who exists in a particular 
situation and whose thinking can only start from the concrete 
situation in which he is. They are indeed right to condemn the 
sort of mental absenteeism which is almost certainly an intel¬ 
lectual sin. But what they are in danger of overlooking is that 
man defines himself precisely in terms of the tension between his 
own situation, which is always singular, and the universal 
values which are proposed to him: values which he does not 
have to create but to assert, and this not only in the abstract 
but by embodying them in his own conduct and work. We can 
indeed say with complete assurance that if the notion of 
commitment has any meaning it must be in relation to an 
absolute which has first to be recognised. As soon as what is 
stressed is not an absolute to be recognised but a creative act— 
an act claimed to be creative—by which human freedom gives 
birth to its own values, anarchy takes the place of reason. And 
as anarchy is untenable, a roundabout road—and something 
very like a crooked way out—will be looked for. This is where 
the notion of history is brought in, and of a historical sense to 
be used as a criterion and to replace the traditional values 
which are to be discredited once and lor all. 

But here again is an innovation which is not compatible with 
what has always been understood as wisdom. If indeed wisdom 
implies maturity it inevitably presupposes an attitude of 
respect for the past. By this I do not mean a blind conservatism 
or a superstitious feeling for tradition. To respect the past does 
not in any way prevent us from recognising—and in a most 
painful way—the mistakes of which our predecessors were 
guilty and of which we may perhaps in some manner have 
shared the guilt. But I think this recognition, and it should be 
as lucid as possible, should not preclude what I would like to 
call an intellectual piety, for, without this, all feeling for 
nuances, and as a result for equity, is completely lost. Yet 
today, still, no doubt, under the influence of committed 
thought, whole periods of history and ‘classes’ of men, seen in 
the distorting mirror of abstraction, are judged in the most 

48 















The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

summary, overall and iniquitous way; while the very same 
people who are so censorious about the past, show themselves 
(in the same spirit of abstraction) remarkably indulgent to the 
abuses growing and multiplying in our own time, which they 
regard as the womb of history. It is not enough to say that this 
way of thinking is unreasonable, it should be stressed that it is 
clean contrary to all wisdom. For if on the one side we have, 
after all, the immense patrimony of history—busy as we seem 
to be dismantling it—we are only dealing on the other with 
unformed and indeterminate possibilities. 

From these considerations, which could be developed further 
and in other ways, there seems to me to emerge this important 
fact: we are witnessing an enormous dislocation of something 
that can now be hardly seen or heard, but which has been 
wisdom. Of that wisdom there is nothing left but ‘scattered 
limbs’. What I mean is this: obviously, the technical processes 
which have been so prodigiously developed and specialised 
during the past half century have as their aim the rational 
ordering of all the resources at the disposal of mankind; a 
whole body of recipes is growing up as to the detailed manner 
of this ordering. Yet if we ask ourselves what is the connection 
between this body—so vast that it has in it the material of 
countless manuals—and what used to be known as wisdom, we 
will ^ee that it is only its residue, its left-over, its dregs. You 
could put it like this: the huge multiplication of means put at 
man’s disposal, and of recipes for their use, takes place at the cost 
of the ends they are supposed to serve, or, if you like, at the cost 
of the values which man is called upon both to serve and to 
safeguard. It is as if man, overburdened by tire weight of 
technics, knows less and less where he stands in regard to what 
matters to him and what doesn’t, to what is precious and what 
is worthless. 

But now let us turn to the corollary, the development, in the 
face of all this technical progress, of ascetic doctrines which are 
usually more or less directly influenced by the initiation prac¬ 
tices of the East—we need only think of Aldous Huxley’s 
recent evolution to get an idea of what this is. I am willing to 
admit the fitness of calling this asceticism wisdom but I believe 

49 


The Decline of Wisdom 

that in doing so there is a danger of overlooking an important 
difference of perspective. What it amounts to is that these 
conceptions can only really come to life within a mystique. I 
am leaving aside the question as to whether such a mystique 
is necessarily tied to a dogmatically defined religion, or 
whether it can take root beyond dogmatism as, for one, 
Huxley seems to believe. This is indeed a most important 
question but it falls outside our present field. It is not that I 
would deprecate mysticism; I would go further: it is not 
impossible that in the past the highest forms of wisdom known 
to man have been largely dependent on a mystique; all the 
same, on the level of experience, everything took place as 
though wisdom had its independent existence. There was a 
sensorium commune (the Latin words are stronger and more 
characteristic than the French or English) and this sensorium 
commune provided a sort of meeting ground for the sacred and 
the profane. What is new is that it is this very meeting ground 
that has collapsed, leaving the world more broken than it has 
ever been, perhaps, in any known epoch. 

This shows itself in every field, even in that of philosophy 
proper. Anyone who has attended international philosophical 
congresses is aware that, even putting aside Marxism and its 
derivatives, there exist in the modern world two distinct types 
of philosophy without any living communication between 
them: there is on the one hand logico-mathematical neo¬ 
positivism which predominates in the Anglo-Saxon countries 
and in parts of Scandinavia, and, on the other, there are the 
doctrines of metaphysical inspiration, whether existentialist or 
not, current in Germany, France, Italy, Spain and in the 
countries of South America. 

But we must go still further. I had occasion the other day to 
say publicly that atonal music often seems formless and without 
content—emotional or other—to those who belong to a 
different musical school: afterwards a mathematician who was 
in the audience came up to me and said: Tncommunicability 
is not confined to the arts, we find it nowadays even in the most 
abstract sciences. Often a highly specialised scientist communi¬ 
cates with hardly anyone outside his own particular field of 

50 
























The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

research and his work becomes a closed book to scientists 
engaged in other fields.* 

Of course, we may hope that a scholar of genius will arise 
tomorrow who will overthrow these partitions and establish an 
exchange between these water-tight worlds. But in the mean¬ 
time the growing number of hermetic languages (hermetic in 
the non-csotcric sense) is creating a real Babel. This has its 
counterpart in the fact that the universal is now on the side of 
applied technics—of technical processes directed to this or that 
practical end. But we may well ask ourselves if this displace¬ 
ment of the universal from the theoretical sphere to the practical 
is not an event of the utmost gravity and one that heralds the 
dusk of civilisation. 

The connection between this phenomenon and the one I 
tried to analyse earlier is obvious. There can be no wisdom 
without at least the veiled presence of the universal. To the 
extent that the universal is debased or driven out, wisdom 
becomes eclipsed and its place is taken by a system of technical 
processes tightly fitted into one another, whose complexity is 
only rivalled by the poverty of the ends it serves. 

There remains a problem which is perhaps the gravest of all. 

No question is more complex or needs greater care in hand¬ 
ling than the relations between Christianity proper and that 
wisdom in the traditional sense I have been dealing with until 
now. Everything depends in the upshot on the way the accents 
are placed on different aspects of the Christian message, and 
also of course on the interpretation given to wisdom, for as we 
have seen it can be understood in very different ways. Let me 
explain. If you consider a sentence such as this, ‘He who seeks 
his life shall lose it’, or this, ‘Unless you become as little children 
you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven’, it would seem 
that they are expressly directed against the notion of wisdom 
we have been obliged to adopt. This is perhaps even more 
evident in the second than in the first example. To become as 
little children: does this not imply giving up all the accumu¬ 
lated experience, all that maturity without which it seems 
impossible to attain to wisdom such as we conceive of it ? Does 
it not at least force us to admit that there are two quite different 

5i 


The Decline of Wisdom 

kinds of wisdom: the wisdom of the world and the wisdom of 
Christ? And we feel at once that between these opposites it 
will not be easy to find a common denominator. I will come 
back to this in a moment. Take the first of the two precepts: 
‘He who seeks to save his life shall lose it.’ Here again there is a 
duality, an antagonism. What do the words mean exactly? 
To ‘seek to save one’s life’, this is surely not only, not even 
chiefly, to look for means of prolonging one’s existence. To 
save one’s life must mean to establish it on what, from the 
natural point of view, is a solid basis, and this involves the use 
of foresight. But what the Gospel shows us is that in acting in 
this fashion we start from a faulty evaluation of what is essential 
and what is not, we labour to preserve what is in reality the less 
important and in so doing, without knowing it, we compromise 
what is in reality the most precious. 

Such examples chosen among countless others show us 
without the least doubt that what the Gospel brought with it is 
what Nietzsche was later to call a transvaluation. This trans¬ 
valuation is indeed so radical that what on one level is seen as 
wisdom on the other level is seen as foolishness. 

As time went on, however, the evolution of moral philosophy 
in Christendom tended to gloss over this paradox and to attenu¬ 
ate its scandalousness; though it is also true that time and 
again there arose great religious souls who reopened the breach 
which others had sought to close and denounced the mis¬ 
direction given, consciously or unconsciously, by the teachers 
of the preceding epoch. 

To be more explicit: in order to make it clear to us that, after 
all, Christianity asks of us nothing that is against reason, the 
accent has been generally placed on the implications of the 
notion of salvation; salvation being represented as the fulfilment 
of our heart’s needs, it was relatively simple to show that to 
follow the precepts of the Gospel—however disconcerting they 
might seem at first sight—was to act with the greatest wisdom: 
for is not wisdom, before all else, the considered appropriation 
of means to an end regarded as an undisputed good? Con¬ 
versely, it could be proved that it is senseless to conform to a set 
of rules directed to a secondary good such as happiness in this 


52 

























The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

world. Indeed, is it not perhaps a mistake or a betrayal even to 
call this happiness a secondary good? Should not its pursuit 
be judged incompatible with the teaching of Christ, whose 
doctrine is a life and a way—a way that leads through the 
Crucifixion? 

Obviously, all this needs infinite shading and qualifying. We 
could say for instance: 

(1) the more the corruption of nature resulting from sin 
is stressed, the more shall we be inclined to suspect and in the 
end even to condemn an ethic, that is to say a wisdom, which 
defines itself in reference to the natural order. 

(2) the more the eschatological character of the basic 
Christian affirmation is brought into the foreground, the more 
shall we be led to stress the urgency of sanctifying action, as 
against that philosophy of slow fruition without which, I repeat, 
it seems difficult to speak of wisdom. 

But really to understand the contemporary situation, really 
to discern the fissure which exists in this domain as in other’s, 
I think that the following observation is necessary: 

I have said that the two kinds of wisdom seemed reconcilable 
in terms of salvation and of its primacy. But what salvation? 
Are we not dealing here with a current notion of salvation 
which is at bottom narrowly individualistic and in danger, 
through its very hardening, of overlooking certain fundamental 
aspects of the Christian message ? There is no doubt at all that 
we must protest strongly against the sort of spiritual utilitarian¬ 
ism which claims to teach the safest way for each of us to attain 
beatitude. How relevant in this connection is Franz Werfel’s 
admirable novel, Heaven Lost and Regained ', where a servant, 
anxious to prepare as well as possible for what she really 
imagines as a kind of celestial spa, undertakes to pay for the 
keep and education of her young nephew destined to become a 
priest, to offer Masses for her intention, and generally to act as 
the best possible intercessor before the One who is the overseer 
of the ordering of eternal life. 

It hardly needs saying that this notion of intercession is 
undilutedly profane. The priest is seen as somebody who has 
enough influence, who can pull the right strings to obtain for us 


53 


The Decline of Wisdom 

the advantages we could not get for ourselves if we were left to 
our own resources. 

From the spiritual point of view, all this is thoroughly 
scandalous, the fundamental error being to imagine salvation 
as a share in a sort of celestial allotment scheme: for whatever 
our idea of Heaven, this allotment scheme notion has to be 
thrown out once and for all. 

All this is indeed strongly felt by Christian consciences 
nowadays and the more alive of them have undoubtedly 
abjured this traditional mistake. The danger is that they might 
fall into a different mistake which is perhaps even more grave. 
What tends to take the place of this individualistic utilitarianism 
is a historicism contaminated by such doctrines as Marxism 
which have nothing whatever to do with Christianity, a 
historicism which tries, though vainly, to obtain the blessing 
of the Church. 

From my own standpoint in the present study it follows that 
this contamination by history is a mortal danger to Christian 
wisdom. We have already had a glimpse of tne reason for this: 
a conception which takes as its terms of reference an imaginary 
future, a future imagined in the abstract, is. contrary to the very 
notion of wisdom. I will give only one example of what I mean 
but I think it illustrates it vividly. I have heard with my own 
ears a well-known cleric laying down in principle that the 
regimes in the Sovietised countries are in line with history and 
almost canonising history itself. And when his attention was 
drawn to the millions languishing in prison and in labour camps 
he exclaimed: ‘What is this in comparison with all the rest?’ 
Actually there are two distinct types of error in this aberration: 
to the error of the historicist proper is added the error of the 
scientist, used to juggling with figures and who takes advantage 
of the very hugeness of the numbers to cease imagining any¬ 
thing whatsoever. It is interesting to note that in this case the 
sin against common sense is also the sin against justice and 
charity. 

Will it be said that this is an isolated instance ? I do not 
believe it. This evil is like a vertigo; for reasons which are 
extremely complex and into which I cannot go in detail, we see 


54 


























The Breaking Up of the Notion of Wisdom 

countless Christians whose heads are literally turned by history, 
people who are desperately anxious to conform to history— 
though history by its very essence is what is impenetrable 
to us. 

Thus it is only fair to admit that even among Christians that 
breaking up or dislocation of wisdom which I have tried to 
analyse is increasingly taking place. For there is clearly a 
danger that as a reaction to this kind of historicist frenzy there 
may arise a frenzy of integralism, a return to the most rigid 
and antiquated thinking in theology. Nothing could be further 
from wisdom worthy of the name. It is true that there always 
remains to very pure and lofty souls the resource of dis¬ 
regarding all this, of escaping upwards as it were into the hope 
of attaining to mystical union. This indeed is the supreme gift, 
the supreme realisation; but in relation to wisdom it is a 
beyond. Besides, even here it is difficult not to feel a certain 
apprehension, for should not holiness and mysticism (which 
are not the same but have between them a most complex 
relationship) have a sort of human foundation of natural 
wisdom and morality? And where this foundation is threatening 
to collapse, is there not a danger of an element of error or at 
least of illusion finding its way into this most pure and lofty 
work ? 

Enough has been said to show the infinitely tragic spiritual 
situation of the modern world. What is particularly grave, if 
we reflect on it, is that wisdom or common sense, untenanted 
and as it were set adrift, may be taken in tow by a singularly 
adroit propaganda which is quite capable, in a transitional 
period, of using them to its own advantage, since these dis¬ 
positions lose their consistency the moment they are no longer 
related to a stable order, to a truth. And we have seen that 
order, stability and truth are mortally compromised as soon as 
it is the will to power that predominates and turns the world 
into a factory. From then on, by what is only seemingly a 
paradox, the practical and the metaphysical problems merge 
into one. I mean that it will not be enough to exhume this or 
that general principle once elucidated by a secular thinker or 
a doctor of the Church; such a principle will be valuable 


55 


The Decline of Wisdom 

towards reconstruction only if it becomes incarnate, and this 
kind of incarnation, as I have said, can only take place at the 
humblest and most intimate level of human hfe: the level at 
which a few men of good will meet to work at a common task. 

I have said a common task, for it is certainly not a question o 
inditing some ambitious and utopian programme. Experience 
has taught us that not only are such programmes doomed to 
failure, but what is more serious, their failure, by a sort o 
inevitable repercussion, worsens the situation they started 
from. I realise that a call to humility is disappointing at a time 
when the label ‘world-wide’ is fashionable whenever an organ¬ 
isation is set on foot. But this fashion is just the mark of one of 
our most harmful illusions. I cannot protest too strongly against 
the notion that our thinking nowadays is only valid if it is on 
a world-wide or planetary scale. Here as everywhere, it is the 
sense of the neighbour that needs awaking, for it is the only 
safeguard against calamities which indeed are certain to be 

world-wide. 


56 





















