THE WILLIAM JAMES LECTURES 


Delivered at Harvard University 


1961-1962 


Gabriel Marcel 


THE 
EXISTENTIAL BACKGROUND 
OF 
HUMAN DIGNITY 


Harvard University Press 


Cambridge, Massachusetts 


© Copyright 1963 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College 
All rights reserved 
Second Printing, 1971 


Distributed in Great Britain by Oxford University Press + London 


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 63-13814 
SBN 674-27550-0 


Printed in the United States of America 


To Henry Bugbee and Hubert Dreyfus, 
whose friendly help has been invaluable, 
with my affectionate greetings 


Contents 


Introduction 

Participation 

Existence 

Fidelity 

The Ontological Mystery 

The Self and Ambiguity 
Human Dignity 

Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 
The Threat to Integrity 


Author’s Works Cited 


Index 


The Existential Background of 
‘Human Dignity 


Introduction 


\ X / HEN I was invited by Harvard University to de- 
liver the William James Lectures for the year 1961, 

I felt immediately that it was impossible for me to decline such 
a flattering proposal. First of all, it would give me a unique 
opportunity to make myself heard in the United States and 
to establish contact with the intellectual élite in this country. 
It would also offer an opportunity to repay to a certain extent 
the debt I contracted long ago toward the American philoso- 
phers of the beginning of this century. Here I allude to Wil- 
liam James himself, to Josiah Royce, and to William Ernest 
Hocking, who honored this University for so long, and whose 
book The Meaning of God in Human Experience, published 
shortly before World War I, influenced me so deeply that I 
dedicated my Metaphysical Journal, published in 1927, to him, 
as well as to Bergson. Hocking and I had corresponded on 
several occasions during the last thirty or forty years, but it 
was only in 1959 that I had the great good fortune of meeting 
him in his delightful Madison home, located in a countryside 
which ranks among the most beautiful I have ever seen, and 
is one of the most appropriate for enriching the contemplative 
thought of a man who, through the visible world, has never 
ceased to have the presentiment of what is eternal. This meet- 


*New Haven: Yale University Press, 1912. 
I 


2 Gabriel Marcel 


ing proved to be a memorable event for me; it was as if a 
blessing had affixed its seal upon it. 

Before endeavoring to describe in broad terms the debt I 
contracted long ago toward American thought in its newest 
and most forceful aspects, I should like to say first of all that 
this thought brought a breath of freshness and life to the arid 
world of speculation that was mine during the years just pre- 
ceding World War I, when I was a prisoner of post-Kantian 
German philosophy in its most abstract forms. True, I was an 
impatient prisoner, even inclined to revolt, but I still did not 
possess the philosophical equipment capable of transforming 
into reality what was then only a predisposition, or a vague 
uneasiness of mind. 

It goes without saying, too, that at that time I had already 
been strongly marked by Bergson, whose courses at the Col- 
lége de France I attended with passionate interest. However, 
I do not believe that I am mistaken when I say that I should 
not have been able to learn from him the beginnings of existen- 
tial philosophy which I discovered through contact with the 
philosophers of this continent. 

I referred earlier to a breath of freshness, and indeed it is on 
this idea of freshness that I must insist at the very beginning of 
these lectures. For the conflict between freshness and staleness 
has, to a great extent, ordered the whole development of my 
philosophical thinking. What I appreciate so much in William 
James is precisely that he appears to have felt in the highest 
degree the need that has become increasingly insistent in my 
own case—to struggle relentlessly against the peril to which 
all thought is exposed: that of becoming rancid, like butter, or 
overripe, like fruit. This need has never ceased to stimulate my 
own thinking. 

Undoubtedly, later on, and in connection with concrete ex- 
amples, especially concerning values, I shall have the oppor- 
tunity to return to this point and to examine the nature of this 


Introduction 3 


process. But it seemed pertinent at the very beginning to point 
out what, for me, is a major concern. 

Furthermore, a thing I have so often experienced in life has 
once more been verified; namely, that a call, which at first we 
might be tempted to say was sent from without, has had the 
eminent value of inciting me to accomplish certain work 
which, left to myself, I might not have had the strength or 
the heart to undertake. But in the perspective that I have 
chosen it is perhaps a mistake to introduce here the idea of 
exteriority. I am deeply convinced that the contacts that play 
such a decisive role in the life of any creator can be really 
understood only if they are interpreted in terms of a certain 
logic, immanent as well as transcendent, without which all 
creation worthy of the name is quite inconceivable. This 
means that we must be careful not to speak of chance in such 
a domain. It is certainly not by chance that in 1949 and 1950 
I should have been invited to deliver the Gifford Lectures at 
Aberdeen, this call having enabled me to achieve the approxi- 
mate synthesis constituted by the two volumes of Le Mystére 
de Pétre. I believe that it is not by chance either that Harvard 
University should have sent me a similar call some ten years 
later; or that I should have become conscious of the task con- 
fronting me today in order to answer this call, and face this 
task in proportion to my strength—now, unfortunately, de- 
clining. In short, this means that the destiny of a philosopher, 
or an artist, or a scientist, implies a type of interplay, very 
mysterious and unforeseeable as to its effects, between what 
one might call his psychological individuality and an environ- 
ment from which he can be isolated only by abstraction. 

Immediately after deciding to accept the University’s invita- 
tion, I clearly saw that these lectures should be concerned with 
the problem of man considered in the anguished context of 
today’s world. At first, I succumbed to the fear of becoming 
involved in a too ambitious undertaking which would exceed 


4 Gabriel Marcel 


my capacities. Thus my first intention was to limit myself to 
the development, although greatly expanded, of the lecture I 
delivered at Saint-Gallen, in Switzerland, in June 1960, on the 
“Problem of Man in Contemporary Philosophy since Bergson 
and Nietzsche.” This, I thought, would have the advantage 
of enabling me to find shelter, so to speak, among the philoso- 
phers whose thought I would have to expound, with the 
possibility of entering in personally in the concluding lectures 
in order to indicate as clearly as possible how my own position 
differed from or approached that of Scheler, Buber, Jaspers, 
or Heidegger. 

On reflection, however, it appeared to me that this would 
not only show a lack of courage, but that it would in a certain 
way frustrate the expectations of my audience. When I was 
honored with this invitation, it was surely not to hear me ana- 
lyze er even comment in detail upon the system of thought 
of such and such a philosopher concerning whom many others 
have or could have spoken with a competence probably 
superior to mine. Thus, I decided to commit myself more 
personally and deeply in what I shall call this adventure. The 
word “adventure” may seem surprising at first; however, it 
corresponds to reality. For reasons those acquainted with my 
work may probably suspect, and for other motives which will 
appear much more clearly later on, it was and had to be out 
of the question for me to present anything that might resemble 
a sort of didactic treatise presented in installments. I could 
not have done so without betraying a certain fundamental 
intention which has asserted itself more and more explicitly 
in my writings, ever since I understood that I could not and 
would not bring forth a system that would perhaps be doomed 
to dry up rapidly like so many others. Even before the 1914 
War, but much more distinctly during and after it, the notion 
of research compelled my attention, a type of research that, 
however much one pursued it, however much it became con- 
scious of its own meaning, remained nevertheless, and had to 


Introduction 5 


remain, research. Yet there was no question of converting it 
into a body of propositions capable of being set up for all 
time and recognized as true, except as regards the mental 
processes by which these propositions were arrived at. Thus, 
it is not at all by chance that my thought should have been 
expressed for a long time in diary form. However, I should 
hasten to add that this was only one of its modes of expression. 
Although traditional philosophers would certainly be unwill- 
ing to admit this, it is undeniable that my dramatic work, far 
from constituting an entirely separate compartment of my life, 
completes indissolubly my philosophical or, I might say, tech- 
nical writings, whether in diary or lecture form. In reality, 
my dramatic work constitutes a vital element of the research 
which I might say has been my unique vocation since that 
distant period when I started to become conscious of my self. 
I shall, in fact, have occasion to return to this point many 
times, because my plays, which are very little known in the 
United States, might be compared to an underground stream 
whose overflow, often scarcely perceptible, irrigates, as it 
were, my speculative thought. 

But here I should like to specify as clearly as I can what the 
term philosophical research represents for me. It is sufficient 
to concentrate one’s attention, as should always be done, I 
believe, on the terminological equivalents of the word “re- 
search” in different languages, to realize that we must place 
ourselves within a certain zone of indetermination. The Ger- 
man word Versuch emphasizes the element of attempt or trial 
that is implied here; whereas the English term inquiry aims 
rather at what would be in the nature of an investigation or 
questionnaire. It might be well, therefore, for us to examine 
rapidly—or rather to review—the different registers in which 
the verb to search may be used. 

The most elementary and undoubtedly the least instructive 
case is the one related to something lost which must be found. 
It seems to me that the English expression to look for corre- 


6 Gabriel Marcel 


sponds to this case. I look here and there in the hope that the 
lost object will come to my attention. After locating it, I 
exclaim: “Here it is!” As a rule, this search will proceed at 
first according to a certain method. Reflection shows me that 
the object searched for can have been lost only since such and 
such a day, or that moment, or at this or that place, upon 
which my investigation will focus. Only if it fails do I despair 
and begin searching almost haphazardly. In so elementary a 
case as this there is no doubt about the nature of the object 
being looked for; there is doubt only about the conditions 
under which it disappeared, since I might, for instance, ask 
myself if it had been stolen, by whom, for what reason, and 
so forth. 

Thus it is easy to go from this example to the more complex 
case of criminal investigation. Here again it is a question of 
finding out something and not inventing it, although, as we 
shall see, even this distinction tends to disappear. The problem 
consists of locating the thief or the murderer, because we are 
certain such a person exists. But in this case it is obvious that 
the search cannot be carried out haphazardly, and we see 
those responsible for it engaged in a type of mental activity 
that is, properly speaking, not unrelated to the creative effort. 
Inevitably, the time comes when Sherlock Holmes or Hercule 
Poirot must work out a hypothesis to orient his action, at 
least temporarily. Moreover, this hypothesis can assume form 
only after a complete inventory of the data has been made. 
The hypothesis will then be used as a point of departure to 
ask a certain specific question of what we very vaguely call 
reality. We must, therefore, proceed in such a way that reality 
will be forced to answer without any possible ambiguity. 
Thus, everything will occur as though a real dialogue were 
taking place between the investigator and reality. Moreover, 
we should have to try to make out what is hidden beneath a 
word as vague and general as “reality.” It is applied to a certain 
body of persons and things bound to one another by relation- 


Introduction 7 


ships that will assume form only progressively. It will have 
been indispensable to circumscribe this body—the way a piece 
of territory is circumscribed—in order to limit the number of 
investigations to be undertaken. It will also have been neces- 
sary to ensure the justifiable exclusion of the possible appear- 
ance of an unknown element not figuring in the body under 
consideration. So long as this appearance cannot be rationally 
ruled out, the investigation will be carried on within an in- 
determinate area. 

But we must realize that whatever the complexity of the 
situation faced by the investigation, it remains within a certain 
field of vision. Here, as in the case of something that has been 
lost, we are obliged to proceed in such a manner that what 
we are looking for finally emerges before our eyes under 
conditions that permit us to exclaim at last: “Here it is!” 

But if we consider now what constitutes research on the 
technical level, it will differ from the cases just described, 
except perhaps in the area of prospecting, where it is intended, 
for example, to reveal the existence in this or that region of, 
let us say, a certain metal or a particular source of energy. 
But I believe the words technical research are not applicable 
here in their full meaning. In my opinion they generally ex- 
press much more the invention of a certain process designed 
to meet a specific need in an area which is, properly speaking, 
that of industry, provided the word industry be taken in a 
sufficiently broad meaning. 

There is, however, something in common between tech- 
nical research and that previously described. There is of course 
no longer any question of discovering or locating an object 
or a cause, but there is one of meeting a need. In both cases, 
however, the search seems to be controlled by an idea that 
exists in the mind of the searcher. 

It is possible, however, that this idea may lose its clear out- 
lines, as in the case of explorations carried out in a completely 
unknown country. Here we might almost say that it is a 


8 Gabriel Marcel 


matter of finding even before searching, or, to be more ac- 
curate, of knowing what we are looking for. We should not 
fail to note either the sense of joyous freedom that accom- 
panies exploration, insofar as it excludes nearly all precon- 
ceived ideas and consequently the always rather painful ten- 
sion attached to expectation of something specific, and the 
anxious confrontation of what is anticipated with what is 
actually found. When the search is centered on a definite 
object, as in prospecting, everything that is not this object is 
dismissed as irrelevant. For the explorer, on the other hand, 
everything that comes into view is in some way welcome and 
appears as a sort of gratuitous gift which is like an enrichment 
for him who finds and receives it. Here I refer to something 
each one of us may have experienced well this side of explora- 
tion as we understand it. This is the experience of the ecstatic 
walker—the adjective in this case assuming definite value in 
conformity with etymology—who feels drawn outside him- 
self by everything that meets his eye. 

In this connection I believe that it is very important to insist 
upon the original nature of the attitude we assume when we 
set out on a voyage of discovery, with no idea of devoting 
ourselves to any utilitarian pursuit—that is to say, to the 
pursuit of an aim or of a specific object. 

But here a comment seems necessary. This receptivity, this 
avid readiness to accept anything that turns up, is usually to 
be found in children who, when confronted with objects as 
well as words, are not yet blasé. That is to say, the edge of 
their thirst for knowledge has not yet been taken off, as it 
almost certainly will be, alas, later, when they will have been 
through school. For then they will be burdened with a knowl- 
edge they were not taught beforehand to seek for themselves 
or even to desire. Furthermore—and we must not overlook 
this point—therein lies the reason why this will constitute 
only pseudo-knowledge, the contrary of true knowledge, 
which is the fruit of internal, organic growth. 


Introduction 9 


The explorer’s position, therefore, in whatever domain, 
seems to me to resemble to a certain extent that of the child 
who has not yet been to school. In any case, discovery will 
be sought for its own sake and will reward the often painful 
effort that, in addition, enhances its value. We come now to 
one of the most disinterested, freest activities that exist, and, 
I might add, one that can make the greatest contribution to 
the flowering of the human spirit. Moreover, it may be said, 
that this activity is nearly always destined to give rise to still 
another type of activity which consists in exploiting for spe- 
cific aims the results to which it has aspired. 

From my own experience, I shall not hesitate to declare 
that the impatient ardor that actuates the philosopher-appren- 
tice is not in itself absolutely different from that which we 
admire in the explorer, or simply in the child, in whom there 
quivers a sort of impatient, universal curiosity. The philoso- 
pher-apprentice, at least in the beginning, also feels that he is 
destined to discover virgin lands; indeed, he realizes that he 
must make his way in a world which seems at first to be en- 
tirely different from the field of his manoeuvres thus far. As 
a result he will often experience, to begin with, a sense of 
intoxication that will be all the purer since his teacher—if 
he is wise—will refrain from overwhelming him with a tech- 
nical vocabulary comparable to that in which he was initi- 
ated, for instance, in mathematics. He will start, therefore, 
with the exhilarating sensation of being at once at home and 
in an unknown country, where everything remains to be dis- 
covered without any visible obstacle standing in the way of 
his progress. However, we should add that, except in one of 
those privileged cases when the original grace we call voca- 
tion has been granted him, he will usually be quickly disap- 

ointed. He will notice that in answer to the questions his 
teacher has led him to put to himself in his own way—when 
the teacher is capable of this—not only does everything seem 
to have been said already, but “solutions” that appear to be 


10 Gabriel Marcel 


completely contradictory have been offered by philosophers 
of apparently comparable reputation. Consequently, not only 
will it seem presumptuous on his part to attempt to form a 
personal opinion on these much-debated questions, but he will 
also have the impression that these opposite solutions neutralize 
one another, that a sort of hopeless greyness overlies the whole 
length and breadth, as it were, of the philosophical landscape. 
However, it would be more accurate to acknowledge that this 
word “landscape” is no longer suitable, and that the student 
has instead the impression of being in a sort of work-yard 
strewn with objects the use of which he no more understands 
than does a stranger walking among the factories and ware- 
houses in an industrial center grasp the meaning of what he 
sees, His initial interest has therefore died down; for him every- 
thing has become merely examination material and he will be 
content to do the subaltern philosophical work that consists 
of learning by heart stereotyped answers to questions that will 
be asked him on the fatal day by some sullen-faced professor. 

But the true philosophical vocation manifests itself first of 
all through the rather mysterious power of resisting this type 
of disillusionment. Furthermore, it is necessary to point out 
that the professor of philosophy, when he is equal to the task, 
will do his best to sustain and, as it were, nourish this resistance 
in the few students he has discovered who give any sign of 
possessing this uncommon gift. It may be added that the phil- 
osophical vocation does not necessarily imply either the in- 
tention of devoting oneself to teaching philosophy, or a desire 
for specialization of any kind. On the contrary, it may very 
well happen that for some reason the man who has chosen 
this career gives absolutely no sign of possessing such a voca- 
tion. This applies to innumerable students who, every year, 
prepare a licentiate’s certificate in a university, and have ac- 
quired in the process a certain smattering of psychology or 
metaphysics. In fact, I should be inclined to deny that the 
word “smattering,” when applied to specialized knowledge, 


Introduction II 


could be used in this case to designate anything of significance. 

But this leads me to specify more precisely than I have done 
thus far just what constitutes this vocation. 

Here I believe we should refer to a fundamental experience 
which in some way was presupposed in what went before, and 
that is the experience of wonderment, or, more precisely, of 
the thaumazein of the Greeks, which lies on the borderline 
between wonderment and admiration. I do not mean by this 
the wonderment caused by a specific phenomenon—as, for 
instance, an astronomic phenomenon such as an eclipse, or the 
appearance of a shooting star—whose nature the scientist 
will be able to explain, or at least define, more or less ac- 
curately, In this case, wonderment will disappear once a 
satisfactory explanation has been given. But it stands to reason 
that this explanation will always be of a particular nature. We 
might say that it will be given within a certain concrete to- 
tality, which in itself will remain outside its grasp, or at least 
will stem from a general and inevitably contested hypothesis 
which, contrary to the specific explanation, will necessarily 
allow the original wonderment to subsist. Since I cited the 
example of astronomic phenomena, I am very naturally re- 
minded of passages from Pascal’s unforgettable Pensées: “I see 
the frightening spaces of the universe confining me, and I find 
myself bound to a corner of this vast expanse, without know- 
ing why I am in this place rather than in another, or why 
this short time granted me to live has been assigned to me at 
this point rather than at another of the eternity that preceded 
me and all that will come after me. In every direction I see 
only infinities that confine me like an atom and like a shadow 
that lasts only a moment, never to return.” Supposing that a 
general hypothesis should succeed in accounting for the mo- 
tion of heavenly bodies, it is quite obvious that it would be 
incapable of putting an end to the fundamental wonderment 
expressed in a text such as the one I have just quoted, or in 
the following one: “When I consider the short duration of 


12 Gabriel Marcel 


my life absorbed in both the preceding eternity and the one 
to come, the small space I occupy and even see engulfed in 
infinite immensity, spaces of which I am ignorant and which 
know nothing of me, I am frightened; and I wonder at finding 
myself here rather than there; why now, rather than then. 
Who put me here? On whose order and under whose guidance 
were this place and this time assigned to me?” 

I shall be expressing a conviction that has remained un- 
shakable with me for more than half a century when I say 
that a philosopher remains a philosopher only so long as he 
retains this capacity for wonderment in the presence of cer- 
tain fundamental situations, despite everything surrounding 
and even within him that tends to dispel it. I am thinking first 
of all of the sort of agnostic resignation that he will have oc- 
casion to inhale like a vapor and which, like a kind of atmos- 
pheric blight, can even affect the vividness of his original 
aspiration. What is the use in exerting oneself, along with 
many others, in an attempt to elucidate what no one has ever 
succeeded in making intelligible? Do not the sterile efforts of 
so many eminent men prove that this search is a vain one; 
that either it is meaningless, or else our structure excludes the 
possibility of reaching a valid conclusion in this domain: that 
is, a conclusion capable of compelling universal recognition? 
However, any philosopher worthy of the name refuses to 
bow before this demurrer opposed to his inner exigency. For, 
in reality, this exigency comprises specifications that corre- 
spond to the philosopher’s own personality. I shall show as 
clearly as possible how, in my own case, little by little, this 
need asserted itself and assumed precise outlines. 

Generally speaking, no doubt, we may say that it is a ques- 
tion of a demand for intelligibility; only we should immedi- 
ately observe that the Greeks long ago, and perhaps even more, 
the Moderns, felt the need to clarify increasingly the nature 
of the act of comprehension itself and to discover not only 
what it consists of, but also how what we call reality lends 


Introduction 13 


itself to such operations, and within what limits. We might 
say more broadly that the principal characteristic of the philo- 
sophical mind consists in constantly restricting the scope of 
what is taken for granted. Thus the wonderment I mentioned 
earlier becomes a sort of challenge. 

Nevertheless, I believe I must add the following: at times 
this questioning activity may end by being used with a sort 
of blind obstinacy; and if it takes this direction, it can de- 
generate into a mechanical process and, as a result, tend to 
lose its own dignity. 

Here the problem I consider to be essential claims our at- 
tention: that of the relationship between philosophical re- 
search and life. We shall see later the central position it has 
occupied in my work, and, further, that it remains in the 
foreground of my immediate concerns. 

It is a fact—and here I refer again to my own experience— 
that a young man who feels the call of the philosophical voca- 
tion I spoke of earlier, may very well launch forth into meta- 
physical speculation even before living it. I can still hear my 
venerable teacher, the sociologist Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, telling 
me one day, perhaps to encourage me—I must have been nine- 
teen or twenty years old at the time: “There are two domains 
in which it is possible to be creative very early: mathematics 
and metaphysics.” And it is indeed true that mathematics has 
witnessed many precocious geniuses such as Pascal, Evariste 
Galois, or Abel, all of whom made decisive discoveries. To a 
certain extent, too, the same holds true in respect to several 
German metaphysicians: here I am thinking of Schelling’s or 
Hegel’s early writings. I must admit, however, that at my 
present advanced age, I am inclined to consider somewhat 
warily any philosophical thought which its author has been 
so bold as to formulate before having had genuinely lived 
experience. I say “genuinely” because there is always the 
experience of others as conveyed through books. This bor- 
rowed experience, however, is never anything but a substitute, 


14 Gabriel Marcel 


imperfect and to a certain extent dubious, for true experience. 

Furthermore, I fear that it might be necessary to give up 
entirely the concept so clearly formulated by Descartes of a 
tabula rasa, arrived at by a deliberate effort of rational think- 
ing and from which, for instance, it would be possible to 
proceed in order to reconstruct synthetically what the phi- 
losopher Hamelin has called in our time “the main elements 
of representation.” Even supposing that such an attempt were 
possible, we should doubtless be obliged to say that it was 
accomplished in the past as well as could be and that there 
is probably no reason to try to renew it. Nor does it seem to 
me that the philosopher has the slightest interest in copying 
the mathematician’s method as Spinoza did, for instance—I 
mean classical mathematics, of course, because present-day 
mathematics has achieved an extremely strict analysis of what 
in the past appeared to the geometrician as pure evidence or 
pure rudiment. In fact, in the next chapter I shall attempt to 
show according to which inner logic in my case the experience 
was, so to speak, reaffirmed within a system of thought which 
seemed to scorn it. In geological terms, what really matters 
is to point out the successive sedimentations, or layers, as a 
result of which my mental soil has become what it is today, 
since to some extent this soil must give sustenance to the 
remarks I shall make later. These remarks will center on the 
problem of man, a problem which I have already said is 
fundamental and impossible to elude. As we shall see, however, 
the preceding statement calls for a correction, because it will 
appear clearly that we are witnessing today an almost sys- 
tematic effort to do away with this problem. But this opera- 
tion cannot be carried out without endangering what we have 
thus far considered to be essential values. Indeed—and this 
will not be the easiest part of my task—I shall perhaps have 
also to show that this past phase of my research, far from con- 
stituting an inert deposit, or a devaluated, obsolete currency, 
should be considered rather as having become a horizon, a 


Introduction 15 


beyond in which past and future meet to enter into a dimen- 
sion which is no longer that of life perceived merely as se- 
quence or as the fall of leaves. 

At the close of this first chapter, I believe it might be 
useful to quote a text which was to appear in my first Meta- 
physical Journal, and which I took up later in Homo Viator. 
It seems to me that this text expresses in a manner that is 
both accurate and synthetic the direction of the movement 
that ever since my first philosophical stutterings, has borne 
me—and I insist on this point—not toward the elaboration 
of a system, but toward articulation of a certain utterance I 
can only call increasingly my own if I add immediately that a 
sensitive ear will perceive in it a sort of secret quaver: the 
quaver of a man who dreads above everything else giving in 
to a presumption to which the philosopher can succumb only 
too easily; of a man who is aware that he is making his way 
along a narrow path between deep chasms, toward an end 
which is not of this world, but without which this world would 
become engulfed in pure nonsense. 


Metaphysical disquiet.—It seems to me that a metaphysical system 
is nothing if it is not the act by which a disquiet is defined and suc- 
ceeds partially—as well as mysteriously —if not in abolishing, at least 
in transposing or transmuting, itself into an expression of self that, so 
far from paralyzing the superior life of the spirit, on the contrary, 
strengthens and maintains it.? 


Here I shall interrupt my quotation to ask myself the exact 
meaning of the expression “superior life of the spirit.” For I 
must admit that today it seems too vague to me and at present 
I would not use it spontaneously. I believe that it refers to 
self-control, in a broader sense of the term than the commonly 
accepted one. This is the self-control that gives the philoso- 
phies of the past their importance. This does not imply, how- 
ever, that we should necessarily subscribe to them as systems. 


2 Metaphysical Journal, trans. Bernard Wall (London: Barrie and Rockliffe, 
1952). Quotations from this work are from the English edition. 


16 Gabriel Marcel 


There is nothing, or nearly nothing, in the writings of Plato 
or Descartes, Kant or Hegel, that does not deserve the most 
serious attention, precisely because these great minds have 
established themselves on a plane which infinitely transcends 
the level of arbitrary, changing opinions, set forth by men 
who never express themselves otherwise than superficially. I 
believe too that the great works of imagination to be found 
on the outskirts of philosophy, not only those of the best in 
literature but those of the great composers as well, offer this 
same characteristic, this sort of specific gravity; and we can 
only pity those persons who today are unable to appreciate 
it. Later, we shall have occasion to point out some of the 
pernicious influences that operate against this faculty. 

After this parenthesis, which seems indispensable to me, we 
return to the text I started to quote earlier. 


What are we to understand by this disquiet? First of all, it is not a 
form of curiosity. To be curious is to proceed from a certain motion- 
less center, to tighten in order to seize an object concerning which 
one has only a confused and schematic mental image. In this sense, 
all curiosity is outward bound. On the contrary, however, to be anx- 
ious is to be unsure of one’s center; it is to be in search of one’s own 
balance. The following is true in any case; if I am anxious about the 
health of someone close to me, my resulting apprehension really tends 
to destroy my inner stability. The more the object of its concern is 
a close part of myself, the more intimately it is incorporated in my 
inner structure, the more my curiosity will tend to become anxiety. 
On the other hand, the anxiety I feel is all the more metaphysical inas- 
much as its object cannot be separated from me without I myself being 
annihilated. It is doubtless true to state that except for the problem 
of “what am I?” there are no other metaphysical problems, since in one 
way or another, they all lead back to it. And in the last analysis, even 
the problem of the existence of other conscious beings is reduced to 
it. Indeed, a secret voice I am unable to silence assures me that if others 
are not, then neither am I. I cannot grant myself an existence, while 
accepting that others be deprived of it; and here “I cannot” does not 
mean “I have not the right,” but rather, “it is impossible for me.” If 
others elude me, then I elude myself. 

Can I say that I feel this metaphysical disquiet in the form of an 


Introduction 17 


immediate reaction, such as that we experience, for instance, when 
waiting for a loved one who is slow to arrive? I do not think so. 1 
should be more inclined to say that circumstances may, and even 
must, inevitably arise in which I shall become aware of an anxiety 
which appears, upon reflection, to extend infinitely beyond these cir- 
cumstances themselves, for it possesses a permanent nature, in that 
it is not bound to this or that present. Furthermore, as soon as it is 
formulated, it extends to all the beings whom I may consider to be 
participating in the same experience that I am. It is anxiety for all of 
us; and this is tantamount to saying that it is not at all a question of 
man in general—a mere fiction invented by a certain rationalism—but 
rather of my brothers and myself.3 


Need I say that this last sentence furnishes to a certain 
extent the keynote, in the musical sense of the word, of all 
the research to come, and that it enables us to see in what 
perspective the problem of man today will be approached. We 
might, if need be, and with certain reservations, speak of an 
existential anthropology as opposed to an anthropology that 
would be a discourse on the essence of man or on human 
nature. But at the same time the fragment that comes to a 
close with that sentence will make it possible for the reader 
to understand why, in the chapters to follow, it seems abso- 
lutely necessary for me to retrace as accurately as possible 
the various stages of the sinuous road I have had to follow 
for the last forty years. I shall also refer constantly, as I go 
along, to the dramatic works that have marked my way. 


* Homo Viator, trans. E. Craufurd (London: Gollancz, 1951). Quotations 
from this work are from the English edition. 


II < 


Participation 


Te avoid any confusion, it may be worth mentioning 
at the outset what perspective I intend to take in 
retracing the main stages of my thought over nearly half a 
century. I have a very definite aim in retracing the way I 
have taken. I want to try and throw some light on the un- 
deniably tragic situation in which modern man finds himself 
today when he attempts to reflect on what I think I must call 
his vocation. I speak of his vocation and not of his nature, 
for the particular disciplines concerned with “man’s nature” 
threaten to dissolve it into an infinite number of different 
components, each one of which, far from being a separate 
element endowed with an intrinsic reality of its own, is in 
turn dependent upon a whole complex of factors apart from 
which it cannot be conceived. Hence in talking of man’s 
nature we risk an infinite regress which is bound to appear 
to a person as an outright dissipation of what he would spon- 
taneously mean in speaking of his substance or of his own 
being. 

I must first point out a strange contrast between the present- 
day world and the world which presented itself to me in about 
1910. As a young Frenchman belonging to cultured middle- 
class circles, I was, on the whole, more concerned with safe- 
guarding the existing order and fundamental liberties than 

18 


Participation 19 


with establishing a stricter social justice, which often seemed 
to me to be inseparable from a suspect demagoguery and from 
a leveling of society to the advantage of the mediocre. In 
spite of serious shocks, which may have been recognized here 
and there as ominous, the world in those days could very well 
be regarded by an inexperienced observer as established for 
a long time to come. Those illusions now appear to me in 
retrospect as little short of absurd. Except for what certain 
young people were doing in taking a militant part in revolu- 
tionary trade union activities and in the Action Frangaise, 
French political life at that time was indeed a stultifying affair; 
I could find nothing in it to excite my interest. I vividly re- 
member my astonishment on learning that a friend of mine, 
whom I very much respected, approved of the civil servants’ 
first strike which took place at about that time. I cannot think 
of a better way than this to show the narrow confines in which 
my imagination was working. I was repelled by the spectacle 
which parliamentary life afforded as well as by the periodic 
administrative crises. I saw the banal and featureless part of 
Paris in which I lived as an outward expression of a dehuman- 
ized, colorless world in which greatness and the tragic had 
no place. In revulsion from such pedestrian surroundings my 
thought soared toward metaphysics. 

I must also point out that apart from Bergson’s lectures at 
the Collége de France, which I followed with a passionate 
interest and admiration, the official philosophy of the time was 
not a great deal more inspiring than the political life. But as 
compensation we did have the history of philosophy taught 
us by such brilliant men as Victor Delbos, and for me this was 
like a window opening upon other horizons. For reasons 
which I am not sure that I can make out with complete clarity 
even now and which might in part derive from my German 
ancestry—my grandparents on my mother’s side were Jewish 
and came from near Mainz—it was German philosophy of 
the most abstruse kind which first aroused my interest. It is 


20 Gabriel Marcel 


true that I was rather quickly to turn toward Anglo-Saxon 
thought, but only toward that school which, from Cole- 
ridge to the neo-Hegelians of the day, had been influenced 
by thinkers on the other side of the Rhine. It now seems to 
me, when I recall this stage of my philosophical development, 
that what attracted me about these philosophers was what 
seemed to me to be the rigorousness of their thought and, at 
the same time—and certainly more than any other factor— 
their ability to surpass and transcend everyday life and all 
its monotonous round of trivial and exacting concerns. 

At this point in my retrospect I find myself up against an 
anomaly which was to be such a decisive factor in all that 
was to follow that I feel I must pause to dwell on it. This 
will to surpass or to transcend which the post-Kantian thinkers 
encouraged in me ran almost contrary to another disposition 
of mine; and perhaps in this connection my paternal heredity 
played a relevant part. My father, a man of the very widest 
culture, whose like I have since rarely met and who held 
extremely important positions—in particular in the administra- 
tion of the Beaux-Arts—had the most lucid, the most exact 
mind. There is no doubt but that in the world, such as he saw 
it, art was of supreme importance, though he had at the same 
time a passion for history. He was horrified by anything vague 
and woolly and his intellectual integrity was exemplary. He 
loved to read aloud and did it remarkably well, and it was 
he who initiated me into many plays, and perhaps contributed 
decisively to my love of the theater. And so, in opposition to 
the strong metaphysical tendency in me, there developed an 
increasingly explicit refusal to abstract from all the concrete 
detail of my life that detail which made my life my own in 
all its irreducible originality. 

Thus a tension developed between these two poles which 
is evident in even the earliest of my essays. Abstraction, far 
from appearing to me as an end in itself, presented at best a 
steep and tortuous path which it was of course necessary to 


Participation 21 


follow, but only in order to come eventually upon the genu- 
inely concrete—a concrete more effectively such than sensory 
experience, wherein sensory experience would doubtless re- 
appear, but transformed and transfigured. 

I need hardly mention that the movement of thought that 
I have just characterized is the same as Bradley’s. I shall never 
be able to say to what precise extent the author of Appearance 
and Reality * contributed to the formation of my thought. But 
without questioning Bradley’s influence in any way I may 
say that the drift of his thought answered to a fundamental 
concern already manifest for a number of years—not in my 
philosophic thinking, but in the working out of my plays. 
From childhood I was attracted to dramatic art, along with 
music. I loved music passionately and even dreamed of de- 
voting my life to it. That was before I had seriously ap- 
proached philosophy. It is clear that in my own case this love 
of the theater and music implied both a passionate interest in 
individual beings and an irresistible attraction toward reality 
in its inexhaustible mystery. I think I can say without hesita- 
tion that it is music, and music almost exclusively, which has 
been for me an unshakable testimony of a deeper reality in 
which it seemed to me that everything fragmentary and un- 
fulfilled on the sensory level would find fulfillment. 

Now it was precisely my problem to reconcile these as- 
pirations, which could not help but appear contradictory at 
first. I began with abstract rigorous thought of which I 
found noteworthy examples in the post-Kantians, though they 
could not satisfy me completely. It became necessary to break 
a path by which I could reflectively rejoin what had been 
given me more or less immediately in dramatic experience or 
in musical intuition. I have said that I was concerned with 
breaking a path. Perhaps it would be better to speak of dig- 
ging a well. A few months ago as I was rereading—often with 


1 Francis H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality: A Metaphysical Essay 
(London: S. Sonnenschein, 1893). 


22 Gabriel Marcel 


a measure of exasperation—my youthful philosophical writ- 
ings about to be published at Louvain,” I felt as if I were 
present at a drilling operation performed by unskilled hands 
and primitive instruments. As is often the case, these writings 
only become clear in the light of the thinking I was to carry 
out much later. I do not wish to reproduce here the dialectics 
which I then developed and which today I by no means judge 
as irreproachable. But in order to show the later development 
of my thought, I shall have to sketch very briefly some of 
the positions with which I was then occupied. 

In an essay which I wrote in 1911, a few months after my 
passing my agregation de philosophie, I came to grips with the 
Hegelian idea of Absolute Knowledge, and even the idea of 
Absolute Experience, in which Bradley’s philosophy, at least 
at the time of Appearance and Reality, reached its culmina- 
tion. What I set out to show was that neither Absolute Knowl- 
edge nor Absolute Experience could be regarded as a self- 
sufficient whole and so could not be the source of a legitimate 
abstraction. This was the very thinking in which the de- 
mand for such a self-sufficient whole was being pressed, with- 
out conceiving any place for itself in that whole. The mis- 
take seemed to me to consist in hypostatizing what is after 
all only a requirement of thought and in believing it possible 
to isolate and consider the product of this act as a reality in 
itself. The philosophers of Absolute Knowledge seemed to 
be victims of the same illusion as the Naive Realists: ““They 
believe,” I wrote, “that they can sever the bond which unites 
the object (in this case Absolute Knowledge): to the subject 
and treat the object as a separate being, without perceiving 
that the reality in question owes its being to the participation 
of the one who is thinking it. Absolute Knowledge, like Mat- 
ter or like Life, is still only an abstraction, although indeed 
the highest and most concrete.” ° 


2 Fragments Philosophiques, 1909-1914. 
° Ibid., p. 43. 


Participation 23 


It will be noted that I have used the term participation— 
an expression which occurs more and more frequently in my 
early writings. With this theme I set out upon the path which 
Louis Lavelle was later to take; but I hasten to add thar this 
distinguished man, in taking this path, was to evince an ability 
to systematize which I myself have never possessed. 

Before going into what I mean by participation I must bring 
up another matter which comes out quite clearly in these ini- 
tial investigations—namely, that we have an unavoidable tend- 
ency when speaking of the human subject to objectify him, 
and so to convert him into a pure abstraction, thereby missing 
the inexhaustible wealth of what Maurice Blondel was later 
to call “la pensée pensante.” Subsequently, I attempted to show 
that it is indeed through the subject that we must try to under- 
stand how we participate in being, but only on the condition 
that the subject be reinstated in his reality as subject, apart 
from all misleading objectification. At the same time I con- 
tinued to insist on the freedom which then appeared to me as 
coextensive with the subject himself and as susceptible of 
affirmation only beyond the confines of any possible positive 
knowledge. On the other hand, in accordance with that con- 
cern which brought me into touch with religious thought, 
I attempted to find in participation in being a principle, which, 
if not identical with faith, was at least open to it—at a time 
when I had not the slightest notion of joining the Church or 
any desire to do so. It is important to point out that I was 
living then in agnostic circles and had received no religious 
education. My father, who came from a Catholic family, had 
detached himself from all matters of religious belief early in 
his life. My aunt, who had brought me up after the death of 
my mother, which occurred when I was nearly four, and who 
had then married my father, was also an agnostic, but in a very 
different sense. I can say without exaggeration that if my 
father belonged to the aesthetic stage (in Kierkegaard’s view), 
my aunt in turn had a purely ethical point of view, and a pro- 


24 Gabriel Marcel 


foundly pessimistic one at that, as far as mankind and life 
were concerned. For my aunt—who gave me an unsurpassable 
example of moral integrity—in a world subject, it seemed, to 
the caprices of blind forces of which the prospect was enough 
to awaken in the soul a despair which knew no refuge, there 
was but a single guiding light, one fixed star: this was moral 
certainty, conceived as both an unfailing respect for truth 
and as action directed unremittingly toward the service of 
others and toward the succor of the disinherited. I do not think 
I am mistaken in saying that the contrast, which at times was 
almost overpowering, between these two visions of the world 
—a contrast which I deeply felt rather than noted—was the 
source of the mysterious but irresistible current which carried 
me toward that third stage, which is neither purely aesthetic 
nor purely ethical, but religious. But at the same time I was 
too deeply influenced by the circles in which I lived and by 
the negative convictions of my relatives not to regard with 
the greatest mistrust the cults celebrated in the churches or 
in the chapels which I entered only occasionally. I remember 
very well on seeing Venice for the first time—I was then 
about ten—how proud I was to have visited with my father 
some twenty churches where I admired the Carpaccios, the 
Titians, the Giovanni Bellinis, and so on; but I saw the 
churches themselves only as museums and I was not in the 
least interested in the anachronistic and, to me, incomprehen- 
sible rites which were practiced in them. What is most sur- 
prising, and what I now find hard to understand in retrospect, 
is that religion, considered in itself and in what might be 
termed its transcendence, appeared to me as being essentially 
untainted by those blemishes which mark the history of cults. 
To account for this paradox I can only form hypotheses. 
Beyond all question the sudden death of my mother gave 
me a lasting shock and aroused in me an anxious questioning. 
I could not tolerate the equivocal position into which my 


Participation 25 


family seemed to fall. I clearly recall a certain walk with my 
aunt when I must have been about seven or eight, during 
which my aunt, having told me that no one could know if the 
dead were completely annihilated or lived on in some way, 
I exclaimed: “When I’m older I’m going to try to find out!” 
And I think it would be a mistake to take those childish words 
lightly: in some way they determined the course I was to take. 

But this is not an adequate explanation of the sort of exis- 
tential assurance by which I came to recognize a mysterious 
primacy in religion. The vague term “primacy” is used ad- 
visedly here; the word “value” would be out of place, and at 
the time of which I am speaking—the year 1911-1912—I 
would have rejected it categorically. But to complicate the 
matter still more, neither would I have accepted the word 
“truth” used in this connection. At that time in fact, I was 
convinced that an idealist like Leon Brunschvig was right in 
insisting upon a strict connection between truth and verifica- 
tion. It seemed to me reasonable to suppose that we would 
be entitled to speak of truth only where verification was pos- 
sible and our powers of demonstration could be brought into 
play. Thus, I was irresistibly led to affirm the existence of a 
region beyond the verifiable which would be the province 
of religious thought. I speak of “religious thought” because 
it is clear that as far as I was concerned religion, if it were 
not to degenerate into practices fit only for sociological study, 
would have to remain thought. And the modalities of such 
thought were what I set out to explore. The difficulty with 
which I had to cope was that of conceiving an order which, 
while irreducible to any objective constituents, would in no 
way be tainted by an arbitrariness commonly believed to pre- 
vail on the level of subjectivity. Thus, with the rudimentary 
instruments at my disposal, it was a question of setting off in 
the direction taken by Kierkegaard, whom I then knew only 
by name, for the two or three pages devoted to him by Hoff- 


26 Gabriel Marcel 


ding, the philosophical historian whose text I had consulted, 
had in no way allowed me to suspect what might have been 
the main intent of this man of genius. 

When I refer to that early period of my thought, my at- 
tempt to conceive participation as transcending positive knowl- 
edge appears as an anticipation of the insight which came to 
me a little later that existence precisely cannot be reduced to 
objectivity. 

But I think I should also say that the assurance of which 
I have spoken was actually given me above all by music. In 
music I found a mysterious and unshakable testimony: A musi- 
cal phrase by Bach or Beethoven—and here I mean almost ex- 
clusively the Beethoven of the last period—seemed invested 
with a supreme authority which did not allow of any explana- 
tion. One was beyond knowledge and yet it was as if one 
breathed a certainty which went infinitely beyond the limits 
of a simple, individual emotion deriving from a particular 
temperament or sensitivity. The greatest musical works seemed 
to invoke directly a certain communion. I speak of commun- 
ion, for each of those involved is not just anyone, and still less 
are these individual representatives of thought in general, of 
the Denken uberhaupt of Kant and the Kantians. Perhaps it 
is the reference to this type of universality in the individual 
which must be kept in mind if we wish even to glimpse the 
meaning of the inquiry in which we are engaged. 

Some of the early texts which I have been reviewing—espe- 
cially the sketch for “Théorie de la Participation”—must be 
read in the light of these preliminary explanations. “Participa- 
tion,” I wrote, 


is not a fact, not a mental endowment, it is a requirement of free 
thought, a requirement which becomes actual in posing itself, since its 
realization does not depend on any extraneous condition. We can, 
however, distinguish two stages of participation, according to whether 
it is defined as an object of thought, or whether thought, renouncing 
its function as a thinking subject, gives itself wholly to participation: 


Participation 27 


this second phase alone deserves to be called Faith: Faith is in a cer- 
tain sense more than an immanent act since it is the accomplishment 
of a dialectic wholly directed towards transcendence. It is manifest, 
moreover—and it is thus that its transcendence is to be defined—that 
this Faith can in no way make itself explicit in a judgment, even in 
a judgment of existence, for the subject which makes judgments of 
existence is already engaged in existing . . . Faith is thus not the af- 
firmation of an existence; the problem of the existence of God—a 
problem completely devoid of metaphysical meaning—could only 
have occurred to a crude intellectualism imprisoned in empirical 
modes of thought concerned with contingent objects. Maimonides 
was right in pointing out that existence could not possibly apply to 
God. 


We may recall that this position was reassumed at the end 
of the nineteenth century by Jules Lagneau, who was the 
teacher of the philosopher Alain, and also of Leon Brun- 
schvig. It should be clear that the text I have quoted is not to 
be construed in any way as atheism. On the contrary, my con- 
cern was to find a possible way of safeguarding the reality of 
God, which appeared to me to be inevitably compromised 
from the moment one speaks of His existence; I thought one 
might speak of the existence of only that which falls within 
the purview of experience. In this there was a Kantian echo, 
to be sure. But what was constantly at stake, even in this in- 
finitely rarefied atmosphere, was to safeguard what from then 
on appeared to me of supreme importance—I mean love, and 
love understood in the deepest, widest, and least psychological 
sense. Today I consider all this research—in itself so confused 
and so clumsily carried out—interesting only because of the 
intention behind it and because of the underlying experience 
which I have attempted to evoke. 

On the other hand, what seems to me now to be still worthy 
of interest is the way in which, on the dramatic level, I tried 
to counteract this almost bloodless speculation; and in this con- 

* Fragments, p. 93. 


5 Pseudonym of the French philosopher Emile Auguste Chartier (1868- 
1951). 


28 Gabriel Marcel 


text I feel I must deal with the two plays which I published 
in the same period, during the winter of 1913—1914, under the 
title of Le Seuil invisible. 

It goes without saying that within the limits I have set myself 
it is not from the playwright’s point of view that I shall con- 
sider these two plays, or those that I shall treat later. I will say 
only that these plays had much in common from the technical 
point of view with the post-Ibsen theater, and especially with 
the work of Frangois de Curel, an author who is today wholly 
neglected but who, at the beginning of the century, enjoyed 
the greatest respect, especially among intellectuals. 

In La Grace,’ written in 1910-1911, I showed the conflicts 
between an intellectual young woman with an uncompromis- 
ingly rational mind, Frangoise, and Gerard, her husband, who 
became converted to Christianity under what seemed to her 
to be highly questionable conditions; in fact, Gerard, having 
discovered before his marriage that he was suffering from a 
lung infection, had wanted to break the engagement. But the 
young woman, passionately, physically, in love with him, had 
refused. She married him and left with him for the moun- 
tains, doing everything that might restore his impaired health, 
only to realize with horror that a kind of spiritual gulf was 
forming between them. She has no doubt whatsoever: it is 
Gerard’s illness which accounts for his religious evolution. He 
is looking for everything that life denies him on the earthly 
level in an imaginary God. I will not go into the action in 
detail, but I would like to point out that in this play I was 
attempting to bring out the ambiguity of a situation which 
allows of two different and irreconcilable readings: that of the 
psycho-physiological materialist, and that of the mystic for 
whom this illness, far from being a cause, is a providential 
occasion which the subject’s creative freedom renders viable 
for faith. To Gerard, Françoise, whom he had first sincerely 
loved, becomes the temptress whom he must resist. At a cer- 

° Published in Le Seuil invisible. 


Participation 29 


tain point he comes very close to yielding to this temptation, 
but Françoise, who is a deeply sincere human being, confesses 
that in her distress and because of her despair over the gulf 
widening between her and Gerard she has given herself to an- 
other man whom she did not really love. Gerard feels her 
betrayal as somehow providential, and following her admis- 
sion he regains possession of himself, and her attraction for 
him fades. As he lies dying, Frangoise’s young brother, Olivier, 
who is not a believer but who is repelled by materialism, comes 
to testify to his affection for Gerard. He tries to join Gerard 
in the faith to which he, Olivier, aspires, but which he is not 
yet able to share. I will quote here the last few lines of the 
play, the implication of which will be clear: 


Olivier. Somehow your faith seems to be more than a truth; it is an 
act, a creation; it is like an idea which transforms and realizes itself 
. . . No? Still more? 1 still feel that what I say leaves you uneasy. 

Gerard (indistinctly). And God? 

Olivier. Is He spirit affirming its unity? Is He self-transcending faith 
. .. Even more? I can’t follow you . . . Perhaps He is only man’s 
supreme longing. 

Gerard (raising himself with effort). God is free! 7 


Then he dies, and Olivier, searching in anguish for the mystery 
of his peaceful countenance, murmurs: “And now this look 
alone remains, and only on the faith in this look . . .” 

It will be seen readily enough that Olivier sums up in a few 
words the very thought I was then trying to develop along 
the lines of participation. But Gerard—in crying “God is 
free!”—puts himself beyond this world of mere thinking. Thus 
the dialogue between Olivier and Gerard transposes to the 
human level, in a context that can already be called existen- 
tial, the sort of hesitation which my philosophical writings 
then showed. I was hesitating between an idealism to which 
I still remained faithful and the trend of my thought toward 
transcending this idealism in the direction of an attempt to 


7 La Grace in Le Seuil invisible, p. 208. 


30 Gabriel Marcel 


reinstate existence, an attempt which was to take place under 
circumstances which I will discuss later on. 

Reference to the final pages of “Théorie de la Participation,” 
to which I alluded earlier in this chapter, and which dates 
from the winter of 1913-1914, will reveal that the affirmation 
of divine freedom is clearly to be found there—but in what 
context? 

I had already tried hard to show that it would not be legiti- 
mate for thought, operating in the name of universal prin- 
ciples, to consign the concrete and individual actually sus- 
taining it to a merely contingent status; that our thinking, on 
the contrary, must acknowledge the noncontingency of this 
experience if it is not to become inconsequential. But this 
brings us back, I continued, to regarding this experience as 
subject to a higher power and this is essentially what the be- 
liever understands by divine will. To transcribe this into the 
personal language that I use when I meditate on my own ex- 
perience: I find myself in strictly determined circumstances 
regarding my birth, the milieu in which I live, the people I 
have met, and so on . . . It would be altogether inadequate 
to maintain that these conditions are due to pure chance and 
for that reason, insignificant. It is in relation to them that I 
have to exert my freedom, and in the course of doing so I am 
led to appreciate my circumstances as having been—in the 
strongest sense of the word—given. In this way I came to think 
of a will which is giving and at the same time free. 

I must admit that this whole discussion, into the details of 
which I cannot enter, now seems very shaky to me: In the 
first place, it seems to me doubtful whether the line of thought 
I have just been sketching can hold good beyond the level of 
an “as if”; I must consider my experience as if the conditions 
in which it develops had been given me by divine will. More- 
over, this very affirmation of divine will depends on the sub- 
ject who makes it. Now, it is clear that the believer—like 
Gerard in La Grace—holds, on the contrary, that divine free- 


Participation 31 
dom is strictly independent of the act which affirms it. And 
it is just this inward division on my part which the closing 
scene of the play shows. On the philosophical level I was 
certainly aware of it, but at the same time I tried to overcome 
it through a dialectic which remained subject to idealist prin- 
ciples. 

But I was, to some extent, to go beyond this idealism in my 
play Le Palais de sable, written two years after La Grace but 
never performed, although in my opinion it is of a much higher 
quality than the play of which I have just spoken. The action 
takes place shortly before the first World War in a French 
provincial town. Roger Moirans, the central character of the 
play, is a politician, a conservative who is dedicated to defend- 
ing the rights of Catholicism against free thought. He has set 
himself up as the champion of traditional morality and has 
just achieved a great success in the city council where he has 
attacked the secularism of the public schools. It is natural 
enough under such circumstances that he should be opposed 
to the divorce of his daughter Therese, who wants to leave 
her unfaithful husband and start her life afresh. In this instance 
he proves himself virtually heartless; all his tenderness goes 
out to his second daughter, Clarisse, whom he takes to be 
spiritually very much like himself. But now Clarisse tells him 
that she has decided to take the veil and become a Carmelite. 
Moirans is horrified by the idea that this creature, so lovely, 
so intelligent, and so full of life, might go and bury herself 
in a convent and he decides to do his utmost to make her give 
up her intention. But Clarisse is stunned to see how passion- 
ately her father fights against what she believes to be her voca- 
tion; the way in which he talks about convent life seems to her 
to be incompatible with a Catholicism worthy of the name. 
Her astonishment is all the greater since, after all, it was her 
father who taught her the awareness of God. He is, then, going 
to be forced to recognize and to admit that the taste he has 
always had for religion, for religious traditions and attitudes, 


32 Gabriel Marcel 


is not an authentic faith, since the sacrifice which Clarisse is 
longing to make appears vain and devoid of any true meaning 
for him. The fact is that he does not believe in the other world 
where her sacrifice would find its full justification. It is not 
too much to say that belief in the world to come, in eternal 
life, seems to him to be a myth and basically absurd. For 
Moirans, religion has always been equivalent to a faith which 
in some way sustains itself through its own ardor, but is de- 
pendent on no transcendent reality. In a word, he is obliged 
to recognize that he is only a religious dilettante. And at this 
decisive moment, in which the fate of the only being in the 
world whom he really loves is in question, he is compelled to 
recognize how hollow and divorced from life his religion is. 

Clarisse is deeply shocked; her father now appears to her 
as an impostor, virtually as a deliberate fraud, and she finds 
herself faced with an agonizing dilemma: she begs her father 
to stop setting himself up as the champion of a religion in 
which he does not really believe and to withdraw from politi- 
cal life; it seems to her that this is the price he must pay to save 
his soul. But Moirans answers her cynically, saying that he 
will consent only if she gives up her intention of entering the 
convent. And suddenly a pall of confusion settles upon the 
unfortunate Clarisse: she begins to wonder if what she has 
believed to be her vocation is not a temptation and if she is 
not bound to repudiate the call which she believed to be ad- 
dressed to her by God. She tries in vain to find the solution 
by consulting a priest who is wholly incapable of understand- 
ing her problem. And everything happens now as if she had 
been in some way contaminated by her father’s thought. The 
stupid things which the priest says in answer to her questions 
suddenly make convent life appear in a sinister light. She con- 
vinces herself that her duty lies in yielding to her father’s 
wishes and at the same time in making him put an end to a 
ghastly comedy. 

And so, apparently, Moirans is triumphant, but at what 


Participation 33 


price? He would now like Clarisse to marry a young doctor 
who has for a long time been in love with her and for whom 
she does have a genuine respect. But Clarisse cannot bring 
herself to marry him. She has put the convent behind her but 
she retains, if not nostalgia, at least the sense of an incom- 
patibility between her own being and the so-called normal 
life of a woman who is to marry and have children. She is, 
it seems, condemned to live from now on with her father, 
straying somewhere between heaven and earth. And her father, 
in these circumstances, is led to make an observation which 
shakes him to the core: he had always, in the manner of the 
idealists, held that each one of us is perfectly alone in life 
and that isolation is, as it were, the price paid for freedom. 
But this really only obtains for someone incapable of love. 
From the moment that one human being loves another a soli- 
darity is created between the two. Moirans has not been able 
to prevent his daughter’s depending on him, and because of 
this he has given her a real power over him. “And so,” Moirans 
exclaims, “is autonomy itself to be an illusion and is one not 
even to have the right to think one’s own thoughts? Can it be 
that I have invested another with this terrible power of de- 
pending on me?” And Clarisse answers, “At last, Father, you 
do understand me. Yes, you gave me this terrible power.” 
Moirans reproaches himself for not having respected Clarisse’s 
faith; but she responds, “Perhaps that moment of feverish con- 
cern on your part came nearest to something like love in your 
life. For at that moment you felt the weight of loneliness and 
you suffered.” 
Moirans. Yes, but why did you have to be the victim of this suffering? 
Clarisse. The fruitless sacrifice of a life was perhaps necessary to ex- 
piate for your having walled yourself in; for you have lived a soli- 
tary life among men. 
Moirans. In what possible realm does this mysterious notion of yours 
hold good? 


Clarisse. It is a realm that we can affirm simply on the strength of our 
being able to think of it. 


34 Gabriel Marcel 


Moirans. And yet if it is not willed by any God? 

Clarisse. Father, remember: our thoughts must be capable of sufficing 
unto themselves; they emanate from no center. They reflect no 
world apart from them. 

Moirans. Ah yes . . . I recognize now what I once thought so wise. 
Why does it seem so different now? 

Clarisse. Because it is something you’ve lived through. 


It is obvious that Clarisse has succumbed to the temptation 
of an idealism that is nothing but a degeneration from an au- 
thentic faith which is in itself prereflective. Certainly we are 
not here in the presence of a thesis disguised as a play. No con- 
clusion is, nor can be, imposed on the audience. What is pre- 
sented here as a definite reality is the bond between beings— 
what I later came to call “intersubjectivity”; in this sense the 
play anticipates what is to follow. 

Perhaps I should add one further remark about the play: 
Moirans appears as utterly blind; his blindness is that of the 
idealist whose thought obstructs communication with other 
people by preventing him from even imagining them in their 
concrete reality. Thus we come upon one of the basic ideas 
of my work, and one to which we shall return in different 
contexts: self-consciousness, far from being an illuminating 
principle, as traditional philosophy has held, on the contrary 
shuts the human being in on himself and thus results in opacity 
rather than enlightenment. 


8 Le Palais de sable, pp. 389-390. 


III < 


Existence 


T= writings to which I have so far referred date from 
before the first World War, and so does the first part 
of the Metaphysical Journal, where a sort of drilling opera- 
tion is tentatively carried out toward a goal which I should 
not have been able to define with any precision at the time. 
It was, in fact, a question of an exploration in the sense I have 
already defined, with all the uncertainties and hazards that 
such an exploration implies. From my present perspective I 
am struck by the fact that this research was directed less to- 
ward man or the human than toward an effort to see how a 
certain metaphysical reality could be, if not grasped, at least 
approached. In an article published in 1912 entitled “The Dia- 
lectical Conditions of the Philosophy of Intuition,” * I at- 
tempted to show that intuition, contrary to what Bergson had 
contended, could not be self-warranting, and that only reflec- 
tion might perhaps, under certain conditions, confirm its value. 

But what strikes me most forcefully today is that all these 
investigations developed out of what I should perhaps now 
call a certain existential security. I am not alluding here to the 
fact that I belonged to well-to-do circles and that the question 
of my daily bread did not bother me unduly. I refer rather 
to the fact that in spite of the several shocks I have mentioned, 

1 Le Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, Paris, 1912. 

35 


36 Gabriel Marcel 


my world—our world for us artists, writers, and philosophers 
—still did not seem to be either seriously or vitally threatened. 

From this point of view the date, August 2, 1914, truly 
marks the transition from one world to another. 

I do not propose to retrace my thoughts and emotions dur- 
ing the war. It seems only necessary to say this: on the one 
hand I do not think that I ever doubted the justice of the posi- 
tion which was ours as Frenchmen or that of the Allies in the 
conflict, even if I was later brought to recognize that at least 
on the Russian side everything was not so pure as I had at first 
naively supposed. But on the other hand, from first to last, 
I felt intimately concerned in this immense tragedy and judged 
severely, as did all my relatives, the attitude of Romain Rol- 
land and his pretense of keeping himself above the fray. And 
so, for the first time, I faced the issue of commitment, which 
was much later to become a focus for my reflection. I must 
add that for reasons of health I had not been called up; unable 
to bear the idea of being an outsider, I had joined the Red 
Cross, to which I devoted a part of my time throughout the 
war. Far from clashing with my genuinely philosophical ac- 
tivity, this Red Cross work involved a task of reflection the 
results of which were to have considerable importance. The 
principal object of my work was to give information to those 
families who came to ask for news of soldiers reported missing, 
that is, of those who did not appear among the dead, the 
wounded, or on the lists of prisoners-of-war. Whenever I 
could, I made a point of seeing personally those who came to 
make inquiries and, far from treating them as mere cases from 
the files, did my best to show them the greatest possible sym- 
pathy. This gave me the opportunity of coming into contact 
with many people from all walks of life and of making a con- 
stant effort to put myself in their place, in order to imagine 
the anguish which they all shared but which underwent subtle 
transformations in each of them. It is against this background 


Existence 37 


of deep distress that each questionnaire, each inquiry, stood 
out. 

Interrogating, making inquires, and responding—these were 
my activities, and, as a philosopher, I tried to throw some light 
on them. 

When I refer to my Metaphysical Journal, however, I note 
with astonishment that it is not until July 23, 1918, that this 
reflection on the questioning activity is formulated: “What is 
interrogation? It is an effort to correct a state of relative in- 
determination.” “Every question,” I said, “implies a disjunc- 
tive judgment, the affirmation that only one of the alternatives 
is true or valid; the recognition of inability to determine which 
alternative, if the subject is thrown back on to his own re- 
sources.” I am confined to my bed, I cannot see what is hap- 
pening outside and I ask: “Is it raining?” The disjunctive 
judgment is: it is either raining or it is not, but I am not in a 
position that allows me to decide for myself. So I ask some- 
one who is in a different position and who is able to inform me. 

It would be advantageous, perhaps, to point out that in 
many cases disjunctive judgment, far from being reduced to 
such a simple form, has an indeterminate and practically in- 
finite multiplicity—for example, if I ask someone: “What’s 
your name?” or “Where do you live?”, and so on. But my 
concern was to discover first in what conditions an answer is 
valid: it must have a precise bearing on the question asked, 
which means that the query has been understood; on the other 
hand, it must furnish the desired information in such a way 
that this information appears to be well-founded and not at 
all arbitrary. But, on the other hand, I said, understanding 
a question is the act of first putting it to oneself, or putting 
oneself in the mental position of the questioner. Consciousness 
is the meeting ground of the question and the answer. I would 
say today, in the light of cybernetics and a host of experiences 
that have become commonplace, that this should be rectified 


38 Gabriel Marcel 


and defined more precisely. If we think, for example, of the 
questions which the scientist asks himself about interplanetary 
space and of the information registered by instruments in 
satellites we see at once that the example I proposed must be 
modified. One can definitely not say that the instrument an- 
swers, any more than the thermometer answers the doctor 
who wishes to know the temperature of his patient. In every 
case it is a question of selected elements which lend themselves 
to a specific reading. It is only from, and as a result of, this 
reading that there can be an answer, and one might without 
undue exaggeration even go so far as to say that the questioner 
is the only one who is in a position to reply, but only at the 
end of an intermediate process which, needless to say, is ex- 
traordinarily complicated. 

But the reader will certainly ask what connection there can 
be between these reflections, which are, in fact, quite elemen- 
tary, and the problem of man, which, we must not forget, is 
and must be at the center of this study. 

Actually, two connected problems then presented them- 
selves to me: on the one hand, how can what we call reality, 
or, if one prefers, mature, answer man in his search for truth? 
In other words, how can something like the exchange which 
is established between two human beings talking to one an- 
other occur between man and nature? On the other hand— 
and it is this question on which I wish to dwell at present 
—how is this dialogue itself, this dialogue between human 
beings, at all possible? It was from this starting point that I 
was led to concentrate my attention on the second person who, 
up to our time, seems to have been so strangely neglected by 
philosophers. In our time, however, a singular convergence 
of thought has taken place along this line, undertaken by men 
working separately and often having no contact with each 
other. I am thinking primarily of the Austrian Ferdinand 
Ebner, whose book Wort und Liebe,? published just before 


3 See Gesamelte Werke (Vienna: Thomas Morus Presse, 1952). 


Existence 39 


the first World War, I did not read until about 1935; but also 
of Martin Buber, whose I and Thou? came to my attention 
only long after I had developed my own views on this point. 
It could probably be shown that this insistence on the specific 
character of the second person is connected with the develop- 
ment of the spirit and method of phenomenology. 

And so it was my concern to go to the root of “thou,” which 
had traditionally been presented to me only as a grammatical 
form. One might also say—although I do not believe that I 
used the expression at the time—that I had to ask myself what 
the grammatical case of the vocative might signify. What hap- 
pens exactly when I address myself to a human being in order 
to... ? For the moment I am keeping this row of dots be- 
cause in order to (in French, pour) can be defined in very 
different ways. 

In developing what has previously been said, let us take the 
very simple case of my addressing an unknown passer-by in 
order to ask him the way. The passer-by is in this case treated 
as a pure source of information; one will at first be tempted 
to say that there is no great difference between the role thus 
assigned him and that of a street map which I consult. Never- 
theless this is only an abstract limit. The “thou” here being as 
little “thou” as possible, we might express this by saying that 
he is not fulfilling the function of an authentic subject (any 
more than the street map is). And yet, in reality, it is still a 
human being that I am questioning, a being who answers me 
in a certain tone of voice, who looks at me in a certain way, 
or who perhaps does not even look at me at all; but in this case 
I would have the painful impression that he is not treating me 
as a human being. In this context one thinks of the numberless 
employees with whom every one of us is obliged to come in 
contact during his lifetime in order to obtain information. 
What a happy but rare surprise when the employee is not 
content merely with dispensing a mechanical reply, as if he 


* Translated by R. G. Smith (Edinburgh: Clark, 1952). 


40 Gabriel Marcel 


were a vending machine, but instead, seems to put himself in 
our position to show that he is concerned to help us and, if 
he does not possess the information required, to show us where 
we might perhaps obtain it ourselves. Examples as common- 
place as this are in reality very instructive, for by them we see 
how the interlocutor can or cannot behave as a subject—that 
is, by treating us (or by not treating us) as subjects ourselves. 
But we must not overlook the fact that the term “subject” 
here takes on a weight of meaning which it too often lacks 
in the usual treatises of philosophy and, especially, of epis- 
temology. 

Another example to be found in my Metaphysical Journal, 
under August 23, 1918, is that of the change which can come 
about during a journey in the relationship which develops 
between myself and a stranger. To begin with, he may be 
only “that skinny little man” or “that short-sighted old man,” 
but if the conversation between us, at first entirely common- 
place and impersonal, brings us to the discovery of a certain 
bond between us, the relationship thus transformed becomes 
one of subject to subject. It is curious to note that I only began 
to use the indispensable term imtersubjectivity much later; 
and yet it is difficult for me today to understand how I ever 
did without it. Certain observations gave me food for thought: 
I am thinking above all of the irritation a person invariably 
feels when he notes that two others are talking about him 
in his presence and calling him “he.” (“He is like this,” or “He 
usually does this,” and so on). A person spoken of in this way 
feels that he is being treated as an object and so is being rele- 
gated to the level of things—or, at best, to the animal level. 
He is being deprived of his status as a subject. One might also 
say that he feels that he is not with (“avec”) the others, that 
he is being excluded from a certain community to which he 
feels he rightly belongs. In such a context the word “with” 
appears in a very clear light; but is it really a question of a 
relationship? Isn’t what we find rather a unity of a supra- 


Existence 41 


relational kind, like the one that Bradley thought he had dis- 
covered in Feeling? “It is enough,” I wrote, “to reflect on a 
relationship of the kind that the word with suggests to recog- 
nize how poor and inadequate our logic is. Apart from juxta- 
positions pure and simple it is in fact incapable of expressing 
relationships of an increasing intimacy. If I simply find myself 
in a train compartment or in an airplane next to someone to 
whom I do not speak and whose face tells me nothing, I can- 
not really say that I am with him. We are not together. I 
might note in passing that the English noun togetherness, 
which has been unfortunately travestied in popular usage, has 
no possible equivalent in French. It is as if the French language 
refused to make a substantive of—that is, to conceptualize— 
a certain quality of being which is concerned with the ‘entre- 
nous, the ‘between you and me.’ ” 

It was from this time that I began to take seriously such 
phenomena as telepathy. Suppose, I said, that telepathy exists; 
in what conditions is it possible? Can it be conceived as the 
transmission of a message? But first, perhaps, it would be well 
to reflect on what a message is and under what conditions it 
can be transmitted. There can be no message of any kind 
without emission, transmission, and reception. It must, more- 
over, be added that the term reception is inadequate to define 
an activity which is in reality very complex and which implies 
a reading or an interpretation. Consider, for example, the case 
of a person telepathically informed of the death of someone 
close to him. Manifestly, this could not be conceived as an 
analogy with the transmission of a message. It would be nec- 
essary in fact to admit that the thought of the dying person is 
endowed with a power of effluence, a phenomenon that is still 
very obscure and perhaps implies a materializing representa- 
tion of thought. But it seems as if this supposed emission must 
be sent out in all directions. How can one conceive that it 
is “intercepted” by the very person of whom the dying per- 
son was thinking, and that the recipient is capable of trans- 


42 Gabriel Marcel 


lating into sound or visual images the wave so received? Are 
not such categories inadequate for something that is rather 
of the type of the supra-relational unity which I brought out 
by deepening the sense of the very simple word “with”? It 
should be noted that other prepositions can likewise come into 
play here. I am thinking of auprès de, whose equivalent in 
English is probably “close to,” and of chez, which has no exact 
English equivalent. These expressions refer to an intimacy 
which is certainly not the same as the interiority on which 
idealists such as Brunschvig laid stress. 

It must be said that the metaphysical—today we would more 
likely say parapsychological—experiments which I personally 
made during the winter of 1916-1917 and which I cannot 
retrace here in detail, although they had really disturbing 
aspects, convinced me once and for all of the reality of those 
phenomena which only ignorance and a willful self-deception 
would permit me to doubt. But from this my mind took a path 
which in France had not then, I believe, been followed by 
anyone, at least by no accredited philosopher, although Berg- 
sonian philosophy, to a certain extent, supported similar re- 
searches. A note dated April 2, 1916, reproduced here as it was 
written, is revealing in this connection: 

I have glimpsed today, on this marvelous clear spring day, that the 
ideas of so-called occult knowledge against which reason attempts 
to rebel are in reality at the root of our most ordinary, most incon- 
trovertible, experiences: experience of the senses, of the will, and of 
the memory. That the will acts as suggestion, let us say as magic sug- 
gestion, who would doubt? And are not bodies, I would not say ap- 
pearances, but apparitions, materializations? And finally, does not the 
experience of memory imply the effective and real negation of time? 
All this is too clear for the half-light of our minds.* 

This note was written before the experiments to which I 
have alluded and, taken word for word, cannot help but raise 
objections: I am thinking of the improper use of the word 

* Metaphysical Journal, p. 130. 


Existence 43 


“occult.” But it is of interest as a rendering—though a very 
clumsy one—of what I would call an anticipatory intuition. 
By a spontaneous movement of thought, whose origins are 
perhaps impossible to recover, I categorically rejected the 
idea, so widely accepted even today, which holds that there 
are on the one hand normal psychological facts to be taken as 
“altogether natural” and as explicable to everyone’s satisfac- 
tion, while, on the other hand, over and above these facts and 
separated from them by who knows what frontier, there just 
may be some strange phenomena which could be accounted 
for at best only by appealing to who knows what forces, or 
what agents, having nothing at all to do with everyday experi- 
ence. To this idea my rejoinder was that we probably enter- 
tain a number of illusions which must be exposed once and for 
all. What one affects to consider as obvious—a sensation, a 
volition, and so on—is in reality no less mysterious than a 
telepathic phenomenon and is probably not of a very different 
kind. It is even likely that we must start from the paranormal 
in order to elucidate the normal—because the very idea of the 
normal is false, in that it derives exclusively from an en- 
trenched habit of thinking which simply obliterates the funda- 
mental strangeness of the datum. 

This is the perspective from which I began to reflect on 
sensation and to question whether or not sensation could be 
construed on the usual, if tacitly assumed, model of a mes- 
sage. At the end of the Metaphysical Journal, and a little later 
in the article entitled “Existence et Objectivité,” which ap- 
peared in 1925,° I had already attempted to show that the fact 
of experiencing a sensation cannot be interpreted as the trans- 
mission of something—say, of a wave—which would be in- 
comprehensibly translated or transcribed in such a way as to 
become what would amount to a psychological state. I took 
the example of an odor, of a perfume: 


€ La Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale, April-June, 1925. 


44 Gabriel Marcel 


Between the bed of flowers whose perfume comes to me—and my 
organism—something travels, something is transmitted to me, which 
the scientist considers as a simple wave of particles. Everyone ad- 
mits, without asking himself what the hypothesis really means, that 
this wave, once communicated to the apparatus which it is capable 
of affecting, is transcribed into olfactory language; however, it re- 
mains to be seen whether basically we have a retranscription similar 
to that which the telegraphist performs on receiving a message, or 
whether at the source of the wave itself there is not a phenomenon 
analogous to the phenomenon which takes place in consciousness; 
in a word, if what I call the flower does not possess an obscure delight 
in existing which in being communicated to me will become perfume. 
Admittedly we may be obliged to regard this question as devoid of 
philosophical meaning. It can be solved—and this in an arbitrary way 
—only if we suppose that we ourselves make a choice which at bot- 
tom is essentially poetical. Moreover, we need to ask ourselves whether 
there is any meaning whatever in the supposition that a transcription 
or a translation of the sensorial message, from whatever origin it de- 
rives, is possible. 

Now, by definition, to translate means to substitute one type of data 
for another type of data, and for a translation to be possible these 
data must in some degree be an object for the mind, whereas in the 
present instance this is inconceivable. For my translating activity to 
be exercised it must be brought to bear on an initial datum; whereas 
in the case of the hypothesis we have in mind the event that I am 
supposed to translate into sense-language by very essence is not given 
to me as datum at all. We are led astray by the crude spatial image 
from which we cannot escape. We become victims of a confusion 
between the perturbation communicated to our organism and the fact 
that this commotion is given as datum to the subject.® 


I would express this today by saying that the preposition to 
(à) presents a completely different index in these two cases; 
it is only in the second that it implies a reference to what I 
have called intimacy, in whatever register of intimacy that 
may be. 

In the light, not only of my later thoughts, but of those 
which were to be formulated often much more distinctly by 
others, and in particular by Heidegger, I would now say that 


° Metaphysical Journal, Appendix, pp. 327-328. 


Existence 45 


what I tried to show was that the fact of experiencing sensa- 
tions is in reality a mode of being in the world. It must be ad- 
mitted that these words are a clumsy rendering of the German 
expression which has now become familiar—in der Welt sein. 

The point of this critique will be clearer in the light of the 
reflections I was a little later led to develop on the nature of 
the relationship between me and my body. It is very impor- 
tant to note that this problem, from a phenomenological point 
of view, takes the place of the traditional question of the rela- 
tionship between soul and body. Attention needs to be focused 
on what the simple words “my body” mean. It is very clear 
that the possessive “my” cannot be taken here simply in a 
possessive sense. The nature of possession, of the act of pos- 
sessing, is indeed difficult to clarify; so much so that I was 
obliged, some ten years later, to sketch out the main lines of a 
phenomenology of having. When I reflect on my body, I am 
naturally inclined to suppose that my body is the instrument 
I use in order to perform a certain number of actions, which 
make contact with what I shall call exterior reality. But analy- 
sis will show that this interpretation—convenient and even 
unavoidable though it may be—is philosophically untenable. 
In fact, if I ask myself what an instrument is, I find that it is 
the extension, artificial or technical, of certain bodily powers. 
If I treat these powers as instruments in themselves I find my- 
self involved in an infinite regress. “If I think of my body as 
an instrument,” I wrote on October 24, 1920, “I attribute to 
the soul, of which it would be the instrument, the same po- 
tentialities which the instrument would be able to realize. I 
furthermore convert the soul into a body and in that way be- 
come involved in an infinite regress.” 7 Of course it was prob- 
ably a mistake to fall back on the idea of a soul in formulating 
this difficulty. For it is I myself as subject who am trying to 
elucidate the relation to this very body, which experience 
amply shows I cannot completely control and which some- 

7 Metaphysical Journal, p. 246. 


46 Gabriel Marcel 


times even controls me. But under the massive pressure of 
experience inseparable from my very self I am obliged to 
protest with equal firmness against all the tentative efforts I 
might make to discover an exterior relationship between my 
body and me: “I am my body.” 

Moreover, one might easily show that this assurance—which 
I later qualified as existential—is most intimately linked with 
the assurance I have in the experience of sensing, which rules 
out thinking of that faculty as a mode of transmission. 

Let us beware, on the other hand, of interpreting the affir- 
mation “I am my body” in a materialist sense. Materialism, as 
such, has no place here. The affirmation only justifies itself 
inasmuch as my body is de-objectified. What possible sense 
could there be in saying “I am my body” if my body could be 
reduced to an extended thing to be exhaustively characterized 
in terms of objective science? I was even led to introduce the 
idea of what I called the “body-subject,” that is, the body 
insofar as it is inaccessible to the manipulations, real or ideal, 
to which the scientist can and must submit extended things. I 
will say, moreover—at the risk of astounding and even shock- 
ing the reader—that in certain instances of healing about which 
there can be no doubt, we must suppose that healing action 
is exerted on the body-subject by the action of subject on 
subject; from this point of view we can understand why it is 
that one who heals almost invariably begins by placing himself 
in a state of spiritual readiness, and why the action of healing 
remains incomprehensible to the healer. I do not wish to dwell 
here, however, on what for me is only an illustration intended 
to make a difficult thought a little more intelligible. 

But on the other hand I asked myself if this quite singular 
relationship—it would perhaps be better to say this mexus— 
between my body and me was not at the very heart of what 
we call existence; if my body as mine, that is to say, taken 
nonobjectively, might not typify existence. “The world,” I 
said, “exists in the measure in which I have relations with it 


Existence 47 


which are of the same type as my relations with my own body 
—that is to say inasmuch as I am incarnate.” ® This point is of 
some importance; for if I limit myself to regarding the world 
as represented (vorgestellt) I become incapable of taking into 
account its aspect as existing; then the troubling question of 
the existence of an external world inevitably arises and in such 
a way as to be unanswerable. But to put the question in this 
way is precisely to obliterate the very same existential feature 
manifest in the union of a subject and a body. In the per- 
spective to which I thus came, the world called “external” 
is on the same footing as to its mode of existence with my 
body, from which I can only abstract myself by tedious mental 
effort. 

So one is led to make a fundamental distinction between 
existence and objectivity, a distinction which in no way coin- 
cides with the one that traditional idealism, particularly since 
Kant, makes between subjectivity and objectivity. 

Should an attitude of this sort be called realist? Only if we 
clearly understand by this an existential realism and not an 
objective realism like Perry’s which is centered on things as 
objects. This is not to question the reality of things but to 
specify that their existence is apprehended by incarnate beings 
like you and me, and by virtue of our being incarnate. Now 
we can begin to see that these reflections have anthropological 
import, though the kind of anthropology in question would 
be philosophical or existential, not a science concerned with 
the objective characteristics and structure of human nature. It 
is evident that a philosophy that gives a central importance to 
incarnation—and, of course, I am not taking the word in its 
theological sense here—will lead to quite a different ethic 
from that proposed by a rationalistic idealism which tends to 
make the most complete abstraction possible from the concrete 
rootedness of human beings. Not that these philosophies neces- 
sarily differ in their fundamental intentions, or that they fail 


8 Metaphysical Journal, entry of December 3, 1920, p. 269. 


48 Gabriel Marcel 


to agree at times in their appreciation of certain acts or modes 
of human conduct. But I think it would be a serious mistake 
to overstate this agreement in order to minimize basic differ- 
ences of principle. I remember that more than fifty years ago 
a philosopher at the Sorbonne who is today my colleague at 
the Institut tried to set up a little moral catechism designed 
to show that everyone was basically in agreement in judging 
this or that act to be licit, illicit, or criminal. I also remember 
that as a philosophical neophyte I was profoundly shocked by 
such platitudinizing of moral thought. I still believe today 
that this reaction was justified. But anticipating a later stage 
in my exposition I would now say that many people at the 
turn of the century, especially professors of philosophy, were 
victims of the strangest illusions concerning the amount of 
moral agreement which they imagined firmly established 
among civilized men. What a terrible awakening was in store 
for these optimists! 

The two plays I wrote during the war, La Quatuor en fa 
diéze and L’Iconoclaste, in no way show traces of the events 
which I was following from day to day with the liveliest 
concern. This is not true, however, of a significant fragment 
from a play written by me at that time, with which I shall begin 
my next chapter. 

On the other hand, Le Quatuor and L’Iconoclaste do bring 
out concretely some of the very personal lines of thought 
which I have evoked above. But this in no way means that I 
set out to illustrate these thoughts. In each of the plays I 
was concerned with certain characters finding themselves in 
concrete situations which had been suggested to me in the 
one case by a family circumstance which it is unnecessary to 
relate here, and in the other by a most extraordinary case 
which had been related to me some years before the war by 
an Englishman I had met in a hotel in Switzerland. 

Claire, the heroine of Le Quatuor, is the wife of Stéphane 
Mazere, a composer. He pretends to love her, but is not faith- 


Existence 49 


ful to her, and Claire, driven beyond the limits of endurance, 
decides to divorce him. Stéphane has a brother, Roger, who 
loves him deeply, but who also has a great friendship for 
Claire and continues to see her after the divorce. But Claire 
seems to be exerting pressure on Roger in order to get him to 
ask her to marry him. She is, or believes herself to be, in love 
with him, while he probably has for her only a confused 
feeling of mingled respect and compassion. They marry. 

But Roger, without telling his wife, whom he feels to be 
hypersensitive and vulnerable, continues to see his brother 
regularly at their mother’s home. They play music together. 
When Claire discovers that Roger has concealed this persistent 
intimacy from her she becomes very angry and shows herself 
inflexible and lacking in understanding. In fact, she personifies 
moral judgment in its most personal, most restricted, and 
spiritually most questionable aspect. Roger is mortified by her 
reaction, which seems petty to him. One wonders whether 
the marriage will survive this trial. 

But then Claire, urged on by a mysterious impulse, con- 
ceals herself in the shadows of a concert hall so that she may 
hear the Quartet in F Sharp which Stéphane has just finished 
and which is his most personal work. And this quartet, in 
which Stéphane has transcribed in an immortal way the drama 
of their life together, and even the memory of their child who 
died in infancy, gives Claire something like an unsuspected 
insight, and so she examines herself in the spirit of this music 
which trancends all jealousies and possessiveness. Can it be 
that her former love for Stéphane is overtaking her? The truth 
goes deeper than this. It is as if, through a sort of conversion, 
but one which has no religious character whatsoever, Claire 
suddenly had access to a world in which all the categories 
which revolve around self-love are transcended. And now, for 
all that she can tell, perhaps what she loved in Roger was a 
reflection of Stéphane. Once again yielding to an irresistible 
impulse she admits this discovery to Roger; and the strange 


5o Gabriel Marcel 


thing is that not only is he not resentful but he receives her 
confession with a sort of gratitude. “You? He?” Claire asks, 
“What are the borders of a personality? . . . Don’t you be- 
lieve that each of us is extended into everything he cares for?” 
And Roger murmers, “There is something moving in that 
thought.” Yes, music tells the truth, and music alone. “Per- 
haps at the bottom of my heart,” Roger goes on, “I held it 
against you that you didn’t love Stéphane more.” And it seems 
to Roger that from that moment of authentic meeting their 
marriage, up to then barren, will perhaps be fruitful. 

Here one meets again the primacy of music, which in a 
certain sense commands the entire development of my thought; 
but, further, it is obvious that music, or musical consciousness, 
appears as completely transcending the realm of Eris—that 
of arguments and disputes in which everyone is revealed as 
being fundamentally selfish, harboring demands and claims 
on others. Thus music appears as the sensuous, and at the same 
time supra-sensuous, expression of that intersubjectivity which 
opens philosophic reflection to the discovery of the concrete 
thou and us. But there is also an intimation here of those re- 
flections on having which I was to develop philosophically 
some ten years later. So, in another instance dramatic vision 
proves to have been anticipatory, revealing in lightning flashes 
a terrain later to be explored in discursive thought. 

It is the same with L’Iconoclaste: Abel Renaudier has been 
passionately in love with Viviane, the wife of his best friend, 
Jacques Delorme. But, thinking that Jacques has deserved his 
happiness, Abel has effaced himself before him and has never 
come forward to declare his love to Viviane. She dies pre- 
maturely. Some time later, during a journey in Russia, Abel 
learns that Jacques is about to marry again, this time a girl 
named Madeleine Chazot. Abel is infuriated by what he con- 
siders a betrayal pure and simple: and, besides, he considers 
himself injured. Did not his sacrifice give him the right to 
think that Jacques would always remain faithful to the mem- 


Existence 5I 


ory of the dead woman? It now seems to him that it is his 
duty to avenge her. Jacques no longer seems worthy of keep- 
ing unblemished the image of the woman he has rejected by 
marrying again. Abel thus resolves to do his utmost to shatter 
the image which Jacques has of Viviane: hence the title, 
L’Iconoclaste. He tries to make his friend believe that he, 
Abel, had once deceived him with Viviane. 

But actually he is not fully aware of the conditions under 
which the second marriage took place. Jacques was so des- 
perate when his wife died that he seriously considered taking 
his own life. But there were his two children whom he had 
no right to forsake. On the advice of a friend he undertook 
to get into contact with the dead woman through the medium 
of automatic writing. A regular communication developed 
between them and it was Viviane herself, or so Jacques be- 
lieved, who begged him to marry Madeleine so that the chil- 
dren would have a second mother. Madeleine, who is a crea- 
ture of great tenderness and devotion, agreed, fully aware that 
Jacques was, or believed he was, in occult communication 
with Viviane. 

I must say in passing that it is this parapsychological part 
of the subject which comes directly from the story I heard 
in Switzerland. The man who told me the story was there 
with the children of his first wife and with the second who had 
just had a child and who appeared completely at ease. I 
brooded on what this woman must have felt, involved as she 
was in this extraordinary bigamy, and this was one of the 
sources of the play, the only one for which I can account. 

And so, what Abel took for a betrayal was really a higher 
form of faithfulness. In the next scene we see that he has found 
a way to sow doubt in Jacques’ mind. Madeleine begs him to 
give her husband back the peace which his soul has lost. For 
she thinks that Jacques might not survive the discovery—that 
he has been the victim of an illusion and has perhaps taken 
for a real communication what might only be an emanation 


52 Gabriel Marcel 


from his subconscious; he could think of the relationship only 
as an illusion if he felt that Viviane had deceived him. Abel, 
horrified by the consequences of his error, and by the suffering 
he has created, tries without success to make amends for it. 
But Jacques no longer believes him. It is in vain that Abel, 
in order to reassure his friend, puts words into Viviane’s 
mouth, saying that when she was dying she asked him to tell 
Jacques to marry again after his death. But suddenly Abel 
feels ashamed of these deceptions. It seems to him that by 
this kind of intrigue he is desecrating the sanctity of her 
memory. He feels that he has no choice other than to be 
absolutely sincere with his friend and he begs him not to hold 
on to the idea of a wholly precarious and dangerous method of 
communication, and to accept the mystery which alone can 
truly reunite. But Jacques himself feels the passionate need 
of direct contact, of verified contact. He must have a Viviane 
present to answer him. I will quote here the final speeches of 
the play, which will be clearer than any commentary. 

Jacques (passionately). To see, to hear, to touch. 

Abel. A temptation which the purest part of you is not deceived by. 
No, you wouldn’t be content in the long run with a world from 
which mystery has been swept away. Man is like that. 

Jacques (bitterly). What do you know of man? 

Abel. Believe me: knowledge exiles to infinity all that it believes it 
embraces. Perhaps it is mystery alone which reunites. Without mys- 
tery, life would be unbreathable. (He turns to Madeleine who re- 
mains seated, motionless, gazing at nothing.) And then, you see, one 
hasn’t the right; no, no, one hasn’t the right. [He means that one 
has not the right to maltreat a human being like Madeleine, who 
through love has agreed to make the greatest sacrifice.] 

Madeleine (imploringly, in a low voice). Be quiet. 

Abel, Ask her forgiveness, humble yourself: there is no other wis- 
dom (with a sort of sob). Judges, and iconoclasts—life itself will 
confound them, life or He who is beyond our words.® 
Thus, in this ending, in a unique dramatic context, the 

positive value of mystery is brought to light, as it comes to 


° L’Iconoclaste, p. 47. 


Existence 53 


be set forth much more explicitly in my later writings. But, 
fundamentally, Jacques and Abel embody each of the con- 
tradictory and seemingly irreconcilable aspects of my thought 
on the problem of survival, and on the conditions in which 
we may or may not get in touch with those who have left us 
and who remain the best of ourselves. We are here at the 
heart of this questioning thought to which I shall have con- 
stantly to return and which is diametrically opposed to a 
didacticism which I have always abhorred. We should keep 
in mind this single sentence which anticipates all that I shall 
have to say later about man today in the dreadful world with 
which his prodigious feats of technology have confronted him: 
“You wouldn’t be content in the long run with a world from 
which mystery had been swept away. Man is like that.” But 
must we not ask ourselves, when faced with the dreadful 
spectacle that we have before our eyes: “Isn’t it possible that 
we might have the power not only to stifle that need but 
utterly to silence it?” 


IV < 


Fidelity 


Coe months ago I reread the fragment I wrote in April 
or May 1918, to which I referred in the preceding 
chapter. It is the first act of an unpublished play called “Un 
Juste” which struck me as having today a significance and even 
a premonitional value perhaps greater than the other writings 
I have discussed up to now. 

It may be best first of all to describe the very special condi- 
tions under which the fragment was conceived. It contained, 
above all, an unmistakable echo of my thoughts as a civilian 
who from the outbreak of the war had been vainly seeking 
equilibrium in what was an essentially false position. The 
issue was not merely to orient myself with respect to the fight- 
ing men, whom I regarded with a feeling of inferiority which 
at times bordered on shame, but also to remain true to myself 
by not adopting an artificial or fawning attitude toward the 
military. At the same time I had to keep from saying in their 
presence anything at all which might be a blow to their morale. 
But then the problem was how to remain sincere. How was I 
to prevent myself from feeling forced into a kind of duplicity, 
or even into a lie toward myself? 

On the other hand, something had happened the year be- 
fore which had left a deep impression on me. A school friend 
of mine, a dedicated philosopher of great integrity and a 

54 


Fidelity 55 


convinced pacifist, had been involved in a case ot propa- 
gandistic pamphlets sent to the front, after the bloody offen- 
sive of April 16, 1917. These pamphlets were undoubtedly 
calls to revolt, and had much to do with touching off mutinies 
which occurred in a number of units and which had to be 
severely suppressed by the commanding officers. A very con- 
siderable number of mutineers were turned over to a firing 
squad. 

I had criticized my friend severely for his behavior, and I 
even wondered how he could endure the thought that he 
might have contributed to the death sentence of some of the 
unfortunates whom he had kindled to revolt. At the same time, 
however, I knew him well enough to realize that his intentions 
had been very pure and that he had behaved as an idealist. 
There was in all this a tragic contradiction which kept me 
thinking for a long time; and such reflection, as so often with 
me, assumed the form of a drama. 

First, it was a question of drawing without the least equivo- 
cation as exact a picture as possible of the mentality of the 
people in the rear of the fighting. In the play, a young soldier, 
François Lecuyer, has obtained leave after having been 
awarded the croix de guerre for distinguished conduct in 
battle. Relatives and friends come forward to congratulate 
him. Among them is an old colonel who in his retirement has 
been following the detailed account of troop operations in 
the pages of a large nationalist daily, and who in perfectly 
good faith recites to himself all the slogans of an optimistic 
command, condemning as bad citizens those Frenchmen who 
read the Swiss newspapers in an effort to become acquainted 
with the enemy’s bulletins. Besides the colonel there are the 
women who want to persuade themselves that their dear sol- 
diers are all cheerful and smiling heroes. But there are also 
those wives, mothers, and sweethearts who are trembling for 
their men and wondering in anguish how long the nightmare 
will last. 


56 Gabriel Marcel 


There is the cynical shirker, sneering and full of defeatism; 
but there is also the badly wounded soldier unable to return 
to the front and to the suffering it entails, while consumed by 
regret at leaving his comrades. The morale of François, the 
soldier on leave, is good, but he refuses to ask himself dis- 
turbing questions as to the probable duration of the war, the 
meaning of that war, and what will follow. His brother Ray- 
mond, exempted on medical grounds, but trying to make him- 
self useful in every possible way, is, on the other hand, ob- 
sessed by these same questions and at the same time feels 
obliged to keep silent. 

But a friend of Raymond’s, Bernard Groult, happens to be 
there too; he is also on leave but he is convinced that he is 
living his last days and that he will be killed as soon as he re- 
turns to the front. He feels that he must communicate to 
Raymond the nonconformist thoughts he had been mulling 
over incessantly during nights in the trenches. It is on the 
questions concerning both the responsibilities and the aims of 
the war that Bernard finds it impossible to agree with the 
so-called good Frenchmen—the conformists—of nationalistic 
circles. This deceitful conformism horrifies him, and he feels 
that since he has fought in the war he at least has the right 
to think his own thoughts and to express himself freely before 
a friend, whereas Raymond does not acknowledge this right 
as far as he himself is concerned, and suffers from the feeling 
of being inwardly silenced. As for the young François, he 
listens to the conversation but is obviously made uncomfort- 
able by it, for it threatens to strike a blow at the morale he 
wishes to keep intact. Unable to endure such talk any longer, 
he slips away. Raymond and Bernard remain alone, and the 
nonconformist soldier no longer hesitates to speak his inner- 
most thoughts. He begins with the origins of the war. Yes, 
no doubt it was correct on the surface to say that Germany 
started the war. But behind that Germany there had been a 
totally criminal Europe. He says: 


Fidelity 57 


I can find no trace of clear thinking concerning the inextricable con- 
fusion of that last week of July [1914], and it seems to me nobody 
wanted what was happening. Everything was ready for the war to 
break out. Who touched off the fuse? I know nothing about it, and 
I’m not even sure if there is any point in asking such a question. 
And even if there had been among them a man, who, in an instant 
of criminal lucidity, might have made the decisive gesture, oh well, 
I say that it would prove nothing. The deed done, everybody be- 
lieved himself attacked, and all people were simply defending them- 
selves, And suppose someone dared to set off all this; imagine, if 
you please, some metaphysical court before which he would have 
to answer. Dared—did we say? Do we know that he did not feel 
himself compelled to give the order which was to start everything 
going? The act we judge the most free, for all we know, was ac- 
companied by a feeling of the most ineluctable fatality. Which are 
we to call right, this immediate feeling or our verdict? And does 
the question itself make sense? | picture this man to myself, hounded 
by demands, reproaches, and ill-concealed threats. Suppose it was 
William IJ. What is to stop us from believing that he thought it his 
duty to forestall a war, and that if he waited a year he would be 
committing a crime toward his people? Why couldn’t he have be- 
lieved all that in good faith? And, after all, would he not have been 
right if he was convinced that the conflict was inevitable? 

Raymond. You know quite well that this is a sophism and that we can 
often prevent things from happening simply by postponing them. 

Bernard. But if he really was a believer and before God felt responsi- 
ble for his people, did he have the right to place trust in the favora- 
ble prospects which might perhaps have emerged if he had waited? 
I imagine him thinking as follows: my duty is to act at any cost. 
Perhaps his logic was crude, and I know our conscience repudiates 
it, but it was the logic of a prudent ruler who fears God. (With 
vebemence): Oh, yes, I am as well aware as you that all of this is tor- 
ture and that it would be better simply to believe like everyone else 
that we were faced with a wolf who had attacked a flock of sheep. 
Am I to blame if I cannot think so? And does my duty simply con- 
sist in plugging up my ears? 

The most tragic thing of all is the fact that Bernard, seeing 
in the whole conflict nothing but a divided Europe in con- 
tradiction with itself, cannot believe in a victory worthy of 
the name. What do those people imagine who announce vic- 


58 Gabriel Marcel 


tory? “A sort of general liquidation. Of what? Of the Ger- 

man people? As if one wiped out an entire nation!” And when 

Raymond objects that it is possible at least to obtain a change 

of regime and create a new state of mind, Bernard replies only 

that such changes cannot be brought about by force. 

Only reflection would be of any value. “Let us admit, how- 
ever monstrous and false the admission, that these atrocities, 
the horror of which you can’t even suspect, instead of killing 
thought and crippling it beyond repair, might some day en- 
courage reflection. But it would be necessary in the event of 
that Good Friday, when an enlightened Germany might kneel 
in repentance, that she should find herself facing just men.” 
And that means men who, on the day they have the power, 
restrain themselves from trampling underfoot all the fine 
principles which they have invoked as long as they found 
such principles convenient. 

Bernard’s words awaken a nameless anguish in Raymond’s 
heart. If we really stop believing that France is shedding its 
blood for true principles, where will our duty lie? The prob- 
lem seems to him relatively simple for soldiers who have only 
to obey. “But the rest of us who have to answer to ourselves, 
what about us, Bernard?” 

Bernard. My poor fellow, what advice do you expect me to give you? 

Raymond. Can you swear to me that in confiding in me you had no 
ulterior motive? 

Bernard. Nothing but a fervent and perhaps cowardly need to be 
understood at last. Í am so very much alone at the front. Oh, there 
are some good creatures worth you and me put together. But all 
the same ... And there are those who unknowingly parody us; 
the poor socialist schoolteacher, whom I mentioned to you before, 
with his gentle look behind his spectacles; and then—much worse 
still—the small-town lawyer who plans to engage in left-wing poli- 
tics. They are not the men who will bring peace on earth. 

Raymond (who has followed his thought). But is it not treason to 
publish these truths? As you were saying a moment ago, must one 
not risk his life every day in order to have the right to stare such 
truths in the face? And yet, if you who are soldiers think that way, 


Fidelity 59 


by what right do the rest of us, who are risking nothing, push this 
war? Is that not another way to be a traitor and even a more hypo- 
critical and vile one at that? 

Bernard. A traitor to what, Raymond? 

Raymond. To one’s self. One can betray only one’s self. All treason 
is simply a lie. And, do you see—I realize that deep down I have 
always thought so. The distress I felt in writing to those at the front 
—the fear of discouraging them, yes—but, above all, the fear of 
feeding artificially the useful fire of patriotism. 

Bernard. Brain fever! 

Raymond. I am continually floundering between these two dangers. 
And now that I have heard you say these frightening things... 
what will happen to me when you are gone? 

Bernard (gently). Yes. 

Raymond. You don’t understand: I meant simply when you have gone 
back. 

Bernard. No, my dear Raymond, you were right the first time: when 
I am gone. (A silence) 

Raymond (painfully). But why, if things are really as you say, what 
good will it do? 

Bernard. You are asking what I would be giving my life for. There’s 
that old obsession with the idea of a barter. As if our loftiest ex- 
periences didn’t become further and further removed from bar- 
gaining. A gift: think of what that word means in its full strength. 
If I were to feel even a vestige of regret, I could no longer believe 
the things I have just told you. The fear that such thoughts express 
only my personal feelings, unworthy grudges, would poison me. 
I can express freely and with certainty the complete horror which 
this war inspires in me only because I have accepted once and for 
all my share of whatever atrocities the war may bring upon me. 
Oh, there are times when I imagine things and when I tremble. But 
lucid thought comes to one only on acceptance of complete sacri- 
fice. Such thought is translucent through and through; it is in- 
carnate in sacrifice, as the soul is in the body. It has not been given 
to me in exchange for something else. 

Raymond. And yet this thought has nothing in it which could enable 
one to live; it reveals error and death everywhere. 

Bernard. How is it then that the look on your face is no longer the 
same since you have understood me? What does it matter if this 
thought, in me who will die tomorrow, is only a conscious and puri- 
fied resignation, if in you it can become translated into action? 


60 Gabriel Marcel 


“Peace to men of good will” is the usual bad translation. It should 
be: “Let peace be wrought by men of good will” (a long silence). 
Raymond (in a low voice). Would that then be my duty? 


In the acts to follow, which were never written, Raymond 
was to become involved in a pacifist action, like that friend 
of mine whom I mentioned earlier; probably at the end, 
horrified by the consequences that his act would have entailed, 
he would have reopened the whole question or perhaps killed 
himself. 

Although the reasons for my not completing this play were 
not then apparent, they are plain enough to me now. Apart 
from the fact that I did not feel myself adequate to portray a 
military setting which I knew only through books or reports 
I had heard, the sequence of action, dramatic as it might be, 
no longer interested me. There was the risk of its developing 
almost mechanically. The essential aspect of the case for me 
Jay in the initial tie between Bernard and Raymond. 

If it appears that I have given too much emphasis to this 
fragment, I may point out that the problem posed there is 
the very one which was to arise again later, particularly in the 
Algerian situation, for example, when a number of well-known 
intellectuals published a manifesto in favor of insubordination, 
the question arose then, and pointedly, as to whether these 
men were behaving like traitors or not. But in terms of my 
own philosophical perspective I should emphasize that it was 
in that rough draft of the play and in reference to a very con- 
crete situation that the problem of fidelity first appeared to 
me—a problem which was subsequently to assume for me so 
important a philosophical role. Now it is interesting to note 
that in this instance, as so often, dramatic creation anticipated 
reflective thought. 

Actually it is natural that it should be so, since reflection 
always comes after experience. But here we are concerned 
with a very special type of experience embodied in imaginary 
people in conflict with one another. The word “imaginary” 


Fidelity 61 
might cause misunderstanding. More precisely, it would be 
important to introduce a distinction between the characters 
who imposed themselves on me with as much force as if I had 
met them in actual life, and those whom I had invented, for 
example, because I needed them to advance the action but who 
were in fact only a means and had no value of their own. Per- 
haps only these invented characters should be called “im- 
aginary.” I should note in this regard that in the so-called 
“piéce a thése,” or philosophical play, a type of drama I have 
always detested for this very reason, the characters are in- 
variably made up in order to illustrate ideas or to serve as a 
foil for those characters who illustrate them. 

If my own plays were of this type, I would have carefully 
abstained from giving them so important a place in these lec- 
tures, since they would add precious little to the philosophical 
writings themselves. But in fact the contrary is true. I should 
be tempted to say that these characters were formed out of 
my own substance in accordance with a process perhaps not 
very different from those studied by biologists. I must also 
add that the words “my own substance” correspond to some- 
thing quite mysterious, something which in no way coincides 
with what might be either the life I have actually lived or the 
characteristics manifested by that life. As Ariadne, the heroine 
of my Chemin de crête, says: “The most terrible thing in life 
is that the possessions of which we have been deprived are 
not only missing, but they exist in us like upside-down 
shadows, nocturnal and devastating powers.” In other words, 
in a very profound sense, we are also what we are not; there 
is a counter-reality to ourselves which is not embodied directly 
in our acts, but which may hover over them like a shadow, 
and I would not hesitate to say that for the novelist or play- 
wright this counter-reality may become the source of creation 
itself. Moreover, in my own experience I have found that 
fictional characters can take shape only within a specific situa- 
tion where they have to confront one another and which I 


62 Gabriel Marcel 


would compare to the harmonic setting in music, within which 
a melodic theme is developed; for the melody never presents 
itself out of the blue, ready for any sort of harmonic setting. 
It is, rather, born into a particular setting—as characters into 
a particular situation. 

I am fully aware of the disconcerting nature of such con- 
siderations for the reader who would probably—and quite 
understandably—expect a professional philosopher to develop 
ideas according to the usual deductive or nondeductive, dia- 
lectic or nondialectic, modes of reasoning. But I have empha- 
sized from the beginning that what I am trying to present 
here is not so much a formal treatise, but rather an inquiry 
which attempts to reflect on its own development. Further- 
more, this inquiry is oriented toward the immediate problems 
which a man must face if he wants to ask himself about the 
future of human reality in today’s world, and about the re- 
sources which may still be available if there is to be any escape 
from a fate which no longer appears to us as external but 
which seems to issue directly from human reality. 

Just after the first World War, while I was at Sens as a 
teacher of philosophy, I wrote a large number of plays which 
seemed to me then to be entirely independent of my philosophi- 
cal work; in fact, it seemed for a while that the plays might 
even take the place of my other writings. I am thinking, for 
example, of Le Regard neuf, Le Mort de demain, Le Ceeur 
des autres, and even of my Un Homme de Dieu and of La 
Chapelle ardente. It was only later that I understood that this 
separation was illusory, and that through all the plays I was 
pursuing the same inquiry which was to become embodied in 
the philosophical writings composed ten or fifteen years later. 

But it seems almost as if it had been necessary for the reflec- 
tive work to be postponed, for if it had been effected pre- 
maturely it would doubtless have struck a blow at the auton- 
omous reality and immediacy of the characters who imposed 
themselves on me in the various dramatic works. I shall come 


Fidelity 63 
back to two of these plays later on. But first I would like 
to return to the problem posed in “A Just Man” in an attempt 
to show how the draft of the play anticipates an existential 
way of thinking long before the more conscious formulation 
of it on my part, and the more systematic development of it, 
in a direction quite different from mine, by Sartre. 

Here exactly is what I mean to point out: we can no longer 
simply ask ourselves whether Bernard’s conclusions were right 
or wrong. We have to make more subtle distinctions here. 
Bernard, as we can see clearly today, is not mistaken when he 
speaks of a Europe at war with itself. The future was more 
than to confirm his fears. The second World War consum- 
mated the suicide of Europe, and all the events which now 
unfold before our eyes at an accelerated pace are simply the 
consequences of that suicide. But the important question is a 
different one; it belongs to the realm of ethics. It is concerned 
with whether Bernard does or does not have the right to 
pronounce before another person a judgment which is going 
to have a profound effect upon that person’s conduct. Nothing 
is more significant than the sentence in which he says that if 
he had not accepted what he thought was the worst for him- 
self, he could not have conceded himself that right. This 
amounts to saying that what justifies not the judgment but 
the articulation of that yuadgment—that is, its place in existence 
—is a certain value which is itself existential. Traditional phi- 
losophy has accustomed us to thinking otherwise by laying 
down as a principle that a truth is in no way affected by the 
situation in which the person who states it is placed. I was 
to express this thought much later by saying that the ontologi- 
cal weight of a statement implies something more than the 
content of that statement. Thus, for example, I was to re- 
proach Sartre, when he came to Geneva in 1946, for having 
welcomed the journalists who came and greeted him by telling 
them, “Gentlemen, God is dead.” I said: “If one sticks to 
the content, that is, to the statement, it is the same as Nietz- 


64 Gabriel Marcel 


sche’s, but in reality it is not the same phrase because the 
existential context is quite different. In Nietzsche this terrible 
affirmation is a private thought uttered in fear and trembling 
by a thinker who feels himself condemned to sacrilege; put 
forth by Sartre at the airport it becomes a headline for the 
dailies and is by that very fact devoid of its substance.” 

Bernard speaks like a man who knows, or thinks he knows, 
that he is going to die and can believe himself morally com- 
pelled to delegate to the one who is going to survive a mission 
which circumstances have not allowed him to carry out, so 
that he judges himself as in error or even guilty for that failure. 
What is certain in any case is that Raymond and, to a lesser 
degree, Bernard, are animated by the same will to be faithful, 
the same deep fear of treason, but without knowing what or 
to whom one must be faithful. What does it mean not to be 
a traitor? 

What I now have to show is how, starting from a date that 
I can no longer fix absolutely, but which must have been 
around 1930 or a little before, this theme of fidelity assumed a 
central importance for me, as is shown by the following un- 
dated note from Being and Having: “Being as the place of 
fidelity.” And I added: “How is it that this formula arising 
in my mind at a given moment of time has for me the inex- 
haustible inspiration of a musical theme?——Access to Ontol- 
ogy.—Betrayal as an intrinsic evil.” * 

There is certainly room for believing that this sentence: 
struck me after my conversion to Catholicism in 1929. But 
this conversion, on which I do not have to dwell here since: 
it belongs to a dimension other than that of our present in- 
quiry, did not appear as a break but rather as the accomplish-. 
ment and almost the conclusion of thoughts which had been: 
developing in me for more than ten years. The question that 
had been posed to me by Francois Mauriac in a letter of 


1 Being and Having, trans. Katherine Farrer (Westminster, Dacre Press,, 
1949). Quotations from this work are from the English edition. 


Fidelity 65 
thanks for the article I had devoted to one of his books, “Why 
don’t you rejoin us?”, consolidated a resolve in me. Whether 
this resolve would have arisen spontaneously or not I shall 
never know. But what is certain is that its crystallization had 
been prepared by the deep friendship which bound me to the 
critic Charles Du Bos, who, though a Catholic by birth, had 
only just rediscovered his own religion at a depth to which 
he had never before had access. How can I fail to underline 
the role of these friendships and such meetings as these in my 
life? These encounters always appear in retrospect as having 
been called for from within my very self so that in such a 
domain the distinction between external and internal ulti- 
mately becomes irrelevant, or, more exactly, becomes ab- 
sorbed into an harmonically richer reality. It seems to me that 
these encounters which enrich the very texture of our lives 
can be understood by analogy with what happens in musical 
creation where one theme calls forth another. 

If now I ask myself about the enlightening force of those 
words, “Being as the place of fidelity,” I would say that a purely 
psychological interpretation which would bring out the role 
that attachments to parents and friends played in my life is 
quite inadequate here and even misses the essential point. It 
would be appropriate, however, to fathom the meaning of 
these words which, taken literally, may well arouse objections. 
These words only seem to assume meaning through some 
such mediating idea as that of “light.” It would be proper, 
moreover, to substitute a verb for the noun and also to have 
recourse to a dynamic terminology rather than a language that 
is too static. We thus end up with formulas such as the follow- 
ing: to live in the light of fidelity is to move in the direction 
of Being itself. But we still have not eliminated the noun, 
Being. Now it is very clear that there would be no sense in 
conjuring up Being as some sort of terminus which we would 
be approaching. On the contrary, we can certainly conceive 
the possibility of a sort of hierarchy among modes of Being 


66 Gabriel Marcel 


so that it would then be possible to be more or less fully. We 
may then understand how one who is faithful would actually 
be on the way to being more fully in contrast to one who 
dissipates himself in conflicting feelings and incoherent actions. 

All of this, however, could take on meaning only if we 
proceed to a scrupulous examination of fidelity, and this 
examination should bring out the necessity of our looking 
upon genuine fidelity as creative in contrast to those who see 
in fidelity something like an inertia of the soul. This con- 
fusion has been indulged and sanctioned in a kind of literature 
whose principal representative in France has been André Gide. 
For the author of Nourritures terrestres, value is tied up with 
the perpetual siege of novelty and with the refusal to let one’s 
self be burdened by a past devoid of life. For my own part, 
I have always been on the scent of novelty in every domain— 
no doubt to excess—but at the same time I have always been 
on guard against this too simple fashion of conceiving our 
attitude with respect to duration and more exactly with re- 
spect to creatures who endure. 


If I am not mistaken, the expression, “creative fidelity,” 
appears for the first time in my essay entitled “On the Onto- 
logical Mystery,” which is at the center of my philosophical 


work: 


Fidelity is actually the exact opposite of an inert conformism. It is 
the active recognition of something abiding, not formally—in the man- 
ner of a law—but ontologically. In this sense fidelity is always bound 
up with a presence, or even with something that can and should be 
upheld in us and before us as a presence, but which, ipso facto, can 
be just as well ignored, forgotten, obliterated—even utterly so; and 
this may remind us of that shadow of betrayal which, to my mind, 
threatens to envelop our entire human world.? 


Thus the connection between fidelity and presence is af- 
firmed with the greatest possible clarity. We meet here for 
the first time in these lectures the term presence, which occurs 


2 Philosophy of Existence. 


Fidelity 67 


so often in my writings; but we must admit that it is certainly 
impossible to give a rigorous definition of it. Presence can 
only be—not grasped, for that would be contradictory—but 
evoked through the aid of direct and unchallengeable experi- 
ences which do not rise from the conceptual apparatus which 
we make use of in order to reach objects. We know only too 
well how easy it is for each of us to find himself with others 
who are not significantly present at all. And, strangely enough, 
this can appear the more clearly the more we know about 
them in a practical way—for example, when we know in 
advance just how they will react, as if automatically, to what- 
ever we may say. We return here to what has been said 
previously on the subject of the thou and of the relation desig- 
nated by the word with. Let us recall, for example, in order 
to see all of this more concretely, the sort of experiences we 
all may have had in connection with a funeral. Certain per- 
sons whom we would consider perhaps as friends have offered 
us only stereotyped formulas which seem to be delivered by 
an automatic distributor, those persons were not present and 
we ourselves were not present for them. Some other person, 
on the contrary, by a look, an intonation, or by the very 
quality of his silence, has brought us an undeniable testimony 
of presence. We were together, and this encounter, this 
co-presence, has left behind a sort of furrow which prolongs 
it. Each of us, if he really wishes to take the trouble to go 
ahead with this sort of discrimination, will come to recognize 
that there are presences and loyalties in his life which differ 
radically from worldly or professional relations and the obli- 
gations which issue from them. 

Here we have a kind of evidence which differs, as much 
as anything could, from Cartesian evidence, that is, from the 
evidence associated with clear and distinct ideas. Must we go 
so far as to say that it is a purely private and incommunicable 
evidence which exists for me alone? I do not think so. I 
rather think that in this case, as in many others, perhaps chiefly 


68 Gabriel Marcel 


in the domain of art, we have to interpose, if I may put it that 
way, an intermediary kind of given between that which is 
accessible to just anybody on the one hand, and that which I 
alone am able to appreciate on the other: this intermediary 
given is for a concrete us; it is an open communion of selves, 
the kind which is formed around a work that is intimately 
loved but which we know will remain a closed book for an 
infinity of creatures. 

These reflections make it possible for us to see very dis- 
tinctly, I think, why it is so difficult to speak of presence; it 
is because through this speech we inevitably transform and 
degrade presence. In order to realize this we need only think 
of the kind of betrayal which so often occurs in commemora- 
tive speeches. It is as if these speeches only contributed to 
obscuring the person in whose honor they are given; for that 
incommunicable essence to which we have vowed our fidelity 
they substitute images or ideas which have virtually nothing 
in common with it. 

An objection is almost certain to arise here and it would 
be well to deal with it directly: do we not usually speak of 
fidelity to a cause or to a principle? But then what becomes 
of presence as we have been defining it? I believe we must 
reply that there may well be some continuity between the 
fidelity which we have been discussing and those attachments 
which may, after all, be nothing more than modes of inertia 
or laziness, a laziness which here amounts to blind obstinacy. 
But in this case, as in so many others, thought has the obliga- 
tion, it seems to me, to reascend this incline of degradation and 
to reawaken in us in some manner the memory of those pure 
experiences charged with Being which habit and the tasks of 
daily life seem joined in a conspiracy to make us forget. 

It would be of some interest to refer here to the profound 
views of Royce on loyalty. He is to be credited with realizing 
very clearly the supra-personal character of the cause to which 
the loyal soul dedicates himself. But this means that the cause 


Fidelity 69 


in this sense can never be reduced to a mere abstract principle 
—for example, that of justice. It is always necessary that 
some concrete context enter into fidelity, and I should like 
to be able to call this context “présentiel,” if this term were 
admitted in philosophical discourse as the term “existential” 
now is. 

But it was in quite a different perspective, it seems to me, 
from that of the Roycian account that I first approached, in 
1932, a problem which since that date has constantly pre- 
occupied me and which, moreover, arises in some manner in 
any involvement whatever. It comes up the moment the 
climate of a certain sincerity, understood as accord with one’s 
self in the immediate, is assumed. It is no doubt superfluous 
to recall how avidly a writer like André Gide has championed 
this sort of sincerity. 

The very simple example to which I refer in Being and 
Having? is that of a promise made—no doubt on the spur 
of the moment—to a sick person whom one has seen in the 
hospital where he is laid up with an incurable disease. As I 
so often do, I resorted to the personal form: seized with pity 
at the sight of the sick person, moved by discovering that my 
visit caused him an unexpected joy, I promise to come to see 
him often. This promise is made on the basis of a certain dis- 
position within me. A few days pass. I notice with some 
embarrassment that although the sick person’s condition is 
not improved, my disposition is no longer the same. A strange 
remoteness has replaced the sincere and immediate sympathy 
that I had felt while with him. Now I think of him only ab- 
stractly. I am going to have to return and visit him since I 
promised to do so, but the visit now assumes a merely burden- 
some aspect. And I asked myself: in making this promise I 
took it for granted, it seems—and implicitly had the under- 
standing if only with myself—that my inner attitude would 
remain the same. But now that I see how poorly I knew my- 

3 Page 47f. 


70 Gabriel Marcel 


self, by what right can I make this sort of draft on the future? 
Or else must I think that by assuming this engagement I was 
telling myself: even though I shall no longer experience a few 
days from now the feeling which at this moment dictates my 
promise, I shall behave as though I were feeling the same way. 
For, after all, I have no right to make this unfortunate man 
suffer the unpredictable fluctuations in my way of feeling. 
However, in this case would I not be condemning myself 
to playing a farce by pretending to feel what I no longer 
feel? Here we have, I may say parenthetically, the theme of 
the heart’s fluctuations, so masterfully elaborated by Proust. 

The example I have given is a relatively trivial one. Further- 
more, I may well be told, reassuringly, that though I may leave 
my home halfheartedly to make the visit, regarding it as a 
chore to be done, there is always the possibility that when I 
arrive in the presence of the sick man, my initial feeling of 
compassion may come over me again. 

But is it not clear that these data recur in the same fashion 
in the vastly more serious case of a promise of marriage? In 
an exalted moment and surely under the influence of a great 
many facts of a nonobjective sort, such as the effects of the 
hour, the surroundings, the landscape, and so on, a young man 
suddenly proposes to a young lady whom he had perhaps not 
contemplated marrying. His proposal is accepted, and there 
he is tied by his promise. What is important to notice here 
is that in cases like this the obscure and unspecifiable condi- 
tions which prefaced the proposal and the subsequent in- 
volvement are scarcely taken into account, and it is even less 
likely that any mention will be made of them between the 
persons involved. How, then, can we dream of making the 
validity of the promise depend on the persistence of the more 
or less determining conditions under which the promise was 
made? Everything happens, then, as though these conditions 
had no bearing whatsoever on the matter. Besides, it is not 
even proper to speak of a judgment here, since that would 


Fidelity 71 
require the conditions to be specified like a bill of particulars, 
which is hardly conceivable. What is in fact produced is a 
decision: I shall treat these conditions whatever they may be 
as negligible. Very probably in most cases this decision is not 
in itself a consciously made decree; let us say rather that every- 
thing happens as though the promise were unconditionally 
binding. It goes without saying that neither would say to the 
other that such a voluntary decree had been taken. It appears 
certain to me that in this sort of situation this type of analysis, 
to which a third unprejudiced party would judge it advisable 
to proceed, will not occur, or, if it does, it would occur only 
later and too late at that. Rather it seems that everything 
happens as though the moment of exaltation I mentioned be- 
fore was asserting itself like an indissoluble absolute, confident 
of its perpetuity. 

It seems superfluous to repeat in connection with this ex- 
ample everything I have said on the subject of the preceding 
one. But obviously the problem of the marriage proposal is 
vastly more serious than the visit promised to the sick man 
and considerably complicated by the fact that commitment 
is mutual. 

But how avoid inferring from all this that an unconditional 
commitment—that is, one in which those involved more or 
less explicitly refuse to consider as relevant conditions which 
obscurely but certainly contributed to it—is an essentially 
dishonest act, or even one that arises from a sort of romanti- 
cism which deliberately fails to acknowledge the structural 
facts of experience. 

Following out this line of thought, which is that of critical 
judgment, or, if you like, of understanding, one might easily 
maintain that only promises of limited duration would meet 
the requirements of a mind concerned to be honest; such 
promises might be renewed of course but only by common 
consent. Naturally, even in such commitments unspecified 
factors would still intervene but the evil would not be great 


72 Gabriel Marcel 


since possibilities of escape more or less comparable to safety- 
valves would have been arranged at the outset. We might 
readily admit that this would only be a compromise, but it 
would surely be the lesser evil, for to rule out all commitment 
would be to instate anarchy pure and simple in human rela- 
tions. 

Nevertheless, it seems to me that something in us protests 
in a more or less inarticulate fashion against this radical elimi- 
nation of unconditional commitment. Should we say that we 
are dealing here simply with a case of a simple anachronism 
and that its sacred character is precisely what ought to be 
considered antiquated? 

But here we are encountering a type of assertion which 
is becoming increasingly fashionable in our times and which 
we find it important to subject to rigorous examination. It 
consists in judging that for contemporary man such an un- 
conditional way of being or of belief is no longer necessary. 
Even some theologians have not been exempt from contamina- 
tion by this odd historicism; I am thinking in particular of 
the rationalism underlying, it seems to me, the thinking of 
Bultmann. “No man today,” he says, “can believe any longer 
in a miracle.” 

Surely those who express such thoughts must be aware 
that in fact there exist men, perhaps even in great numbers, 
who do not seem to suspect any such incompatibility between 
their belief and the requirements, set up as normative, for 
modern man. But this fact could be met by treating that 
anachronistic mentality as a fossil—as if one were dealing with 
individuals who did not know they belonged to historical 
layers covered over by later sedimentations. 

For my part, however, I would say that we should denounce 
right now the illusion associated with this type of assertion. 
In fact we should survey with the greatest care the fields in 
which the word “antiquated” may properly be used. This 
is the case in the scientific field insofar as certain theories 


Fidelity 73 
or hypotheses really seem to have been definitively refuted 
or superseded. I say “seems” because it is possible that an 
idea once believed to be absolutely and forever obsolete may 
reappear in a renovated form. Nonetheless we may, despite 
this reservation, accept in principle the fact that in the positive 
sciences, and even more so in the technological sciences, we 
are confronted with genuine irreversibility. 

We may be tempted perhaps to say the same, though in a 
very different sense, for customs, mores, and institutions. 
Yet it would be necessary, if we take history into account, to 
introduce many fine distinctions; revolutionary upsets may 
always occur to belie for an indeterminate time any assertion 
that “it is no longer possible today . . .” One need only re- 
member, for example, what has happened in certain people’s 
democracies, such as Czechoslovakia. 

Nevertheless an exception must certainly be made—and we 
shall see why more and more clearly—of the field in which 
freedom reigns sovereign, the domain of love and, I would 
add, of faith. But what comes in and confuses everything here 
is the devaluation in everyday usage of such words as love 
and faith; and it must be noted as an agonizing paradox that 
it is exactly on words designating the highest realities that 
this devaluation—I might even say degradation—is most 
widely exercised. 

From what I have said there is every reason to view with 
the greatest distrust the presumption of those who dare to 
assert, for example, the disappearance of the sacred. 

It is appropriate at this point to introduce an essential dis- 
tinction: It is easy to see how in the world around us the 
process of abolishing the sacred is accomplished and is ac- 
celerated, and it is not difficult for us to imagine that here 
or there a state of things could be established so that the very 
meaning of the word sacred would no longer be understood 
by anyone. But this by no means signifies that, judged from 
the standpoint of reflective thought, this obliteration de facto 


74 Gabriel Marcel 


of the sacred corresponds to a refutation de jure. Everything 
seems to indicate that this radical profanation could not be 
accomplished without striking a blow at what are probably 
unformulated needs which are deeply inscribed in the very 
heart of a human being. Eventually I shall have to return to 
this problem, which is an extremely acute one in the world 
today. But I could not speak of unconditional commitment 
without at least mentioning it. 

What must also be brought to light is the fact that love, in 
the fullest and most concrete sense of the word, namely, the 
love of one being for another, seems to rest on the uncondi- 
tional: I shall continue to love you no matter what happens. 
This is at the very opposite pole from the conditional com- 
mitment which seems to presuppose a de facto if not a de jure 
stability only under the limited circumstances in which it 
is made. We should also say that love, far from merely re- 
quiring the acceptance of risk, demands it in a certain manner; 
love seems to be calling for a challenge to be tested because 
it is sure to emerge the conqueror. 

When I refer back to those “Notes” of 1932 which figure 
in Being and Having and to the “Meditation” of 1933 for 
which they were prepared, I find that at that time I did not 
place so much stress on risk. My fundamental preoccupation 
is expressed rather by the simple formula which will be the 
starting point of my next chapter: the necessity of restoring 
to human experience its ontological weight. It would hardly 
be wrong to say, it seems to me, that in these few words, 
whose meaning needs to be elucidated, the program for all 
my later investigations was expressed. 


The Ontological Mystery 


| CANNOT overlook the disconcerting character that the 
end of the preceding chapter may have had for some of 
my readers. This may have been due simply to the still far 
too indistinct way in which the inquiries concerning human 
relations and their possible evaluation were intermingled with 
strictly metaphysical investigations. The programmatic for- 
mula on which I ended, “the necessity of restoring to human 
experience its ontological weight,” compels me, by the very 
fact of its obscurity, to make an indispensable clarification. 

Such a formula expresses a very particular sort of insight. 
I say “insight,” not intuition, because this latter term has been 
used by philosophers, especially in our time, in senses too 
diverse and sometimes even too poorly defined to permit our 
using it without equivocation. In truth, it is the Greek word 
syneidesis which appears to me to be the most adequate. As 
the etymology of the word suggests, what is meant is a kind 
of vision which brings things together and which, precisely 
for that reason, implies a prior development. But at the same 
time it seems to me that this syneidesis must subsequently 
prompt us to an intellectual task which consists first in scruti- 
nizing its sense or value. If I consider in an objective manner 
the words “the ontological weight of human experience” their 

75 


76 Gabriel Marcel 


meaning is certainly not manifest and, conceivably, to some 
of my readers they might seem literally meaningless. 

In order to clarify this formula, it is certainly proper to 
begin with the fact that what a person says may have weight 
or not, but obviously we are dealing with a quality that can 
be appreciated, but not measured, as it is literally unquantifi- 
able. Let us try to be more precise and remember that what 
a person says embodies.a suggestion formulated in a definite 
context, and in a context perhaps capable of orienting my 
behavior. To say that the suggestion has weight appears to 
indicate that it has been duly thought out and is in direct 
contrast, for instance, to a suggestion given lightly and im- 
pulsively. The latter incorporates no guarantee of any sort. 
But between the weight and the warrant of an assertion there 
exists a definite connection. If this suggestion has weight for 
me, it is because it was given to me by someone whom I have 
every reason to trust. One might even add that the weight 
is not separable from a certain substance—I might even call 
it a certain density—which corresponds to an abundance of 
motivation, completely absent in one who speaks without 
rhyme or reason. 

These introductory remarks at least have the value of bring- 
ing certain matters into focus, as one does with an optical 
instrument. 

But what does ontological weight mean here? In another 
note dating from about the same time, I spoke of an ontologi- 
cal stake. Let us note that I was not taking account of the dis- 
tinction made by Heidegger between ontic and ontological. 
Ontological weight means the weight of Being or weight with 
respect to Being. But it is necessary to add immediately that 
all this is absolutely incomprehensible if one includes in the 
meaning of the word Being anything that might be compared 
to an object. We observe in passing that the English language 
does not permit drawing a distinction between Sein and Sei- 
endes, which at least can be translated into French. But it 


The Ontological Mystery 77 


seems to me indispensable to underline the fact that the Being 
which is meant in such expressions as ontological weight or 
stake must be understood as a verb and zot as a noun. And 
when I look back at all these 1932 texts, I am tempted to think 
that on this point I have not always been explicit enough. For 
instance, in the “Meditation” of 1933, to which all these notes 
were precursors, I said that Being is that which resists or would 
resist a reductive analysis bearing on the immediate data of 
experience. The danger that such a formulation presents is 
that it seems to interpret Being as residual. The difficulty in all 
this stems from the fact which Bergson to his great credit em- 
phasized so unremittingly, that human language seems indeed 
to be modeled on things. 

We would be closer to the truth if we said that the irreduci- 
bility affirmed in that formula belongs to an experience on 
which critical analysis has not and cannot have any hold, short 
of substituting for the experience something else, something 
that it is not. Nevertheless, this formula is still unsatisfactory. 
To assimilate Being to a mode of experience is to fall into the 
pitfalls of psychology and psychologism. It would not be 
wrong to say, in a perspective quite similar to that of Fénelon, 
that we human beings are a species “in-between,” between 
Being and Non-Being, or even that we are called upon to be 
—that it is our responsibility to be. What begins to emerge 
here is the plenitude to which we aspire. Yet here again the 
language is deceptive. It could, in effect, cause us to think 
of Being as an ideal. But, precisely, between Being and the 
ideal there is a radical opposition. And we could return here 
to what was said in an earlier chapter about “participation.” 
But as I have already explained, this term “participation,” al- 
though used systematically by a thinker like Louis Lavelle, is 
itself definitely subject to caution insofar as it seems to invoke 
a part-whole distinction. Now the plenitude in question can- 
not in any way be identified with a totality susceptible of 
being divided or fragmented. 


78 Gabriel Marcel 


We could, on the other hand, help forward the course of 
thought as much as possible in the direction of Being by re- 
ferring to a concrete totality such as an orchestra performing 
a polyphonic work. Each performer indeed plays his part in 
the ensemble; but it would be absurd to identify this ensemble 
with an arithmetical sum of juxtaposed elements. We should 
completely misunderstand what a musical ensemble really is. 
But we can very well imagine the process of thought in the 
course of which the instrumentalist, who in the beginning 
was conscious only of the part which had been entrusted to 
him—if only because he had had to work on that part sepa- 
rately at first—little by little becomes consciously aware of the 
ensemble. And it is probable that by that very fact the inter- 
pretation of his own part will be transformed. It is obvious 
that this concrete whole, namely, the performance of the 
polyphonic work, cannot be likened to an ideal. From the 
viewpoint of the composer each part could only be conceived 
as a function of the whole. The whole precedes the parts, as 
many philosophers, especially Kant, have shown in the case 
of living organisms. 

Here we have a comparison which is enlightening, at least 
to a certain point. But we must admit that nothing permits 
us to assert that each individual’s experience can be compared 
to a part in a symphony. The symphony presupposes the com- 
poser who has thought it through as well as the orchestra 
leader in whom or by whom this composer’s thought is ac- 
tualized. But it would be falling again into a precritical dog- 
matism, it seems to me, to claim from my experience alone, 
with its gaps and its insufficiencies, that I am obliged to go 
back to the existence of an all-inclusive thought which con- 
trols it. It would be hardly less arbitrary, moreover, to deny 
a priori the existence of such a thought. In other words, ever 
since I have begun to think for myself, I have never ceased 
to protest just as much against an absolute idealism (considered 
preferably in the terms of the Anglo-Saxon neo-Hegelians) as 


The Ontological Mystery 79 


against those philosophies which have dogmatically taken the 
opposite stand. Here I have in mind certain pluralists at the 
beginning of the century. 

But what we have to become aware of, short of any ad- 
herence to such doctrines, is that any human experience lends 
itself to an internal transformation somewhat comparable to 
that I alluded to apropos the instrumentalist. And what may 
be even more important is that each of us this very day may 
meet another human being who will appear to be much farther 
ahead than any of us along that way of which we can see 
only the beginning, as when we seek our way in a fog. Once 
again, let me adopt the personal form of expression: this per- 
son presents himself to me as a witness. He attests by his pres- 
ence to that mode of being toward which I am groping and 
trying to carry with me all those who are close to me. But 
what in fact is being attested in this manner? What is disclosed 
to me is that this other person bears in himself a certain life 
and that he radiates this life like a light. And from the moment 
that I benefit from this attestation it may well be that I aspire 
to become a co-witness with this other being. The charac- 
teristics of this life considered in its increasing dynamism will 
appear more clearly in what follows, but what we can say 
now, in order to avoid an indeterminacy comparable to a rari- 
fied atmosphere in which thought cannot live, is that this life 
is inseparable from love. 

If we return to the initial formulation, the elucidation of 
which was our task, we may say, although it is still only a 
tentative approximation, that what I have called the ontologi- 
cal weight of human experience is the love which it is able to 
bestow. 

But here again we must be careful not to succumb to the 
temptation to psychologize. And here it is essential to invoke 
the distinction between problem and mystery which suddenly 
forced itself upon me in the winter of 1932. This distinction 
also was revealed to me in a flash of insight, a syneidesis, with- 


80 Gabriel Marcel 


out my being able to reconstruct completely the process of 
thought which led me to it. It was while I was taking a walk 
in Paris that the insight suddenly came over me. Unfortunately 
this distinction has been overused by the popularizers and 
their books, and it has become a sort of philosophical com- 
monplace, losing thereby the original and challenging char- 
acter which it had initially. I believe I must cite here the few 
lines from Being and Having where this sort of insight is re- 
corded: 


October 22nd 
The Position of the Ontological Mystery: Its Concrete Approaches. 


This is the proposed title for my paper to the Marseilles Philosophi- 
cal Society. The phrase ‘mystery of being, ontological mystery’ as 
against ‘problem of being, ontological problem,’ has suddenly come 
to me in these last few days. It has enlightened me. 

Metaphysical thought—treflection trained on mystery. 

But it is an essential part of a mystery that it should be acknowl- 
edged; metaphysical reflection presupposes this acknowledgment, 
which is outside its own sphere. 

Distinguish between the Mysterious and the Problematic. A prob- 
lem is something met with which bars my passage. It is before me in 
its entirety. A mystery, on the other hand, is something in which I 
find myself caught up, and whose essence is therefore not to be before 
me in its entirety. It is as though in this province the distinction be- 
tween in me and before me loses its meaning. 


I shall end the quotation at this point, but not without not- 
ing that I allude a little later on to the fact that Maritain had 
already recognized that there is a mystery of knowledge which 
is of the ontological order. Specifically, this view is expounded 
in Réflexions sur Pintelligence, the only work of the Thomist 
philosopher, it seems to me, that made a strong impression 
on me; and indeed it may be that it was through this book that 
I was led to make the fundamental distinction I am discussing 

1 Being and Having, p. 100. 


? Jacques Maritain, Réflexions sur l'intelligence et sur sa vie propre (Paris: 
Desclée, de Brouwer, 1931). 


The Ontological Mystery 81 


here. As in another instance—I have in mind particularly 
Schelling’s distinction between negative and positive philoso- 
phy—it is possible that the progression of thought was pro- 
moted by a misconception and that I had understood by the 
words “mystery of knowledge” something which was in itself 
quite foreign to Maritain’s thought. I might note in passing 
that we saw each other continuously during a winter spent 
in Versailles, at the home of our mutual friend, Charles Du 
Bos. What Maritain tried to do was to instruct both of us in 
certain aspects of Thomist doctrine, but, as a matter of fact, 
neither Charles Du Bos nor I was converted by any manner 
of means to this type of thought. 

To tell the truth, I am not certain that the term “mystery” 
—for which I can find no equivalent that satisfies me—has 
not helped maintain a somewhat regrettable confusion; “mys- 
tery,” at least removed from its theological context, is hardly 
separable from certain associations from which it should be 
completely dissociated. When a writer of detective novels, 
for example, entitles one of his books The Mystery of the 
Yellow Room, he is telling us implicitly that he will proceed 
to the elucidation of a certain affair which, at the outset, is 
presented as obscure and perplexing. Here the skill of the 
author is exercised at the beginning of his story by rendering 
this obscurity as impenetrable as possible. The mystery con- 
tinues to exist for us as long as the key to the enigma has not 
been revealed. We are a priori certain, when we begin to read 
the novel, both that the solution exists and that it will be dis- 
closed to us at the end of the story. It is the structural condi- 
tion of this genre of literature. 

But what should strike us immediately in speaking of the 
mystery of Being is that in this case some mystery of an en- 
tirely different sort is meant. If we viewed this matter from 
the perspective of a certain kind of agnosticism which was 
widespread in the nineteenth century (but which appears 
today to be somewhat out of fashion), we would be tempted 


82 Gabriel Marcel 


to speak of an insoluble problem—that is, a problem which 
does not allow of a solution. It seems to me, however, that 
philosophers today would be quite willing to admit that, tak- 
ing all things into account, a problem which does not allow 
of a solution is no doubt a problem that has been badly posed 
(I recognize, however, that one could argue this point). But 
what is certain is that the word “mystery” is used in Being 
and Having and in all my subsequent writings in an absolutely 
different sense. The word applies to what cannot be conceived 
as a problem, to what is repugnant to problematizing. Clearly, 
we link up here with what in the Metaphysical Journal, some 
ten years before, I had called the “non-mediatizable immedi- 
ate,” * as opposed to the common or everyday immediate 
which, unlike the former, gives rise to an indefinite number 
of mediations. What must be stressed above all is that the mys- 
terious evoked here must be looked for in the direction of light 
rather than in the direction of obscurity. Whatever is obscure 
is, in effect, for the mind the initial phase of a certain elucida- 
tion; and, inversely, no elucidation is possible except in regard 
to a datum which is relatively obscure. The highly varied and 
complex operations studied by epistemology appear upon re- 
flection as ideal manipulations carried out on data which have 
themselves been produced by previous elaboration. 

But reflection shows that our experience is by no means 
reducible to such schema and that it is very far from lending 
itself to an unlimited problematizing. We could say further 
that all problematizing is accomplished on the basis of that 
which in itself is not capable of being problematized. I have 
often stressed the limitations which attend all optical repre- 
sentations of knowing. In an excellent article in Commonweal 
on my style of thought, Mr. Seymour Cain observed correctly 
that I am not a spectator who is looking for a world of struc- 
tures susceptible of being viewed clearly and distinctly, but 
rather that I listen to the voices and appeals comprising that 


*Page 248. 


The Ontological Mystery 83 


symphony of Being—which is for me, in the final analysis, a 
supra-rational unity beyond images, words, and concepts.‘ 
Nothing could be more precise. Without any allusion to the 
fundamental role that music has played in my life, it must be 
remembered that my thinking takes its departure above all 
from feeling, from reflection on feeling and on its implica- 
tions. Moreover, all that has been said previously, and espe- 
cially in Chapter III, on the impossibility of being content 
with a dualistic interpretation of the relations of the mind and 
the body, must be recalled here in its totality. 

Perhaps in order to disentangle this skein of thoughts which 
cannot be fully apprehended except as a whole, it is best to 
concentrate attention here on two words that are quite simple 
but which encompass an infinity—sy life—and, above all, 
the fundamental situation it presupposes. I should note in pass- 
ing that my reading of Jaspers’ System of Philosophy,° studied 
at that decisive time for me to which I am referring in this 
chapter, contributed greatly to my understanding of the cen- 
tral importance of this idea of situation which had already 
captured my attention a decade earlier. The peculiar quality 
of this fundamental situation which is mine, or which shapes 
me into myself, is that it can only be explored to a limited 
extent. Moreover, I find today that the closer I draw to my 
life’s end the more I concern myself with those who have 
preceded me, with the conditions attendant upon my coming 
into the world—and this, when there is no longer the possi- 
bility on this side of the grave of my obtaining the clarifica- 
tions which seem indispensable to me; but at the same time I 
am aware that at that remote period when those individuals 
who might have been able to enlighten me were alive, the idea 
of questioning them would not have entered my mind, for an 
invincible shyness would have restrained me. And, besides, 
what I would like so much to know today about them was 


‘Issue of December 9, 1960. 
6 Philosophie von Karl Jaspers (Berlin: Springer, 1932). 


84 Gabriel Marcel 


perhaps at that time not of a nature to be discussed or revealed; 
undoubtedly it was only vaguely grasped by the individuals 
themselves whose thought or, more exactly, whose existence, 
I vainly endeavor to scrutinize today. 

Here there is a paradox which, it seems to me, we have not 
stressed sufficiently until now and which appears to me bound 
up with what is most tragic in our condition—that “too late,” 
which keeps resounding in our ears when we enter the closing 
phase of our existence. It is only then that we feel ourselves 
to be, if I may venture to say so, on the same level with those 
who have gone before us, and we feel for them a brotherly 
devotion. It is only then that we can understand them—and 
a poignant regret consumes us at our former lack of under- 
standing of them while they were still with us, and at our mis- 
takes and the sorrow which they no doubt caused. It is also 
in this vein of thought that one of my characters—one of 
those with whom I most closely identified myself—expresses 
himself at the end of L’Emissatre. 

“There is one thing I have discovered since my parents’ 
death: what we call being a survivor is in reality to live not 
so much after as under; those we have never ceased to love with 
whatever is best in us become something like a living, invisible 
arch which we sense and even brush against, on the strength 
of which we are able to go on even as our powers diminish, 
wrenched from ourselves, toward the moment when every- 
thing will be caught up in love.” ° 

Perhaps I shall have to return later to these words of Antoine 
Sorgue, which seem to express as nearly as possible the type 
of fundamental conviction around which all my thoughts as 
a mature man have converged. Chronologically this text is 
much later than those from which I am seeking to sift out the 
concrete meaning, since it dates from 1948. But it is related 
directly to the meditations on “The Mystery of the Family,” 7 


* Vers un autre royaume, p. 109. 
1 Recherche de la famille: essai sur “Petre familial” by G. Marcel et al. 


The Ontological Mystery 85 
developed by me during the second World War, and these 


meditations, in turn, illustrate in a concrete manner the pros- 
pective affirmations of 1932 on “The Ontological Mystery.” ° 
It is also from the meditations on “The Mystery of the Fam- 
ily,” collected subsequently in Homo Viator, that I borrow 
the long quotation which follows and which appears to me to 
make comprehensible the thoughts—difficult in themselves— 
around which this entire chapter gravitates: 


I have to realize that behind the lighted but much restricted zone 
which I call my family there stretch, to infinitude, ramifications which 
at least in theory I can follow out tirelessly; only in theory, however, 
for in fact an impenetrable darkness envelops this “upstream region” 
of myself and prevents me from exploring any further. I can discern 
enough, however, to enable me to follow this umbilical cord of my 
temporal antecedents, and to see it taking shape before me, yet stretch- 
ing back beyond my life in an indefinite network which, if traced 
to its limits, would perhaps be coextensive with the human race itself. 
My family, or rather my lineage, is the succession of historical proc- 
esses by which the human species has become individualized in the 
singular being that I am. All that it is possible for me to recognize 
in this growing and impressive indetermination is that all these un- 
known human beings who stretch between me and my unimaginable 
origins, whatever they may be, are not simply the causes of which 
I am the effect or the product: there is no doubt that the terms “cause” 
and “effect” have no meaning here. Between my ancestors and myself 
a far more obscure and intimate relationship exists. I share with them 
as they do with me—invisibly; they are consubstantial with me and 
I with them. 

By this inextricable combination of things from the past and things 
to come, the mystery of the family is defined—a mystery in which I 
am involved from the mere fact that I exist. Here, at the articulation 
of a structure of which I can only distinguish the first traces, of a feel- 
ing which modulates between the intimate and the metaphysical—and 
of an oath to be taken or refused binding me to make my own the 
vague desire around which the magical fomentation of my personal 
existence is centered. Such is the situation in which I find myself, I, 
a creature precipitated into the tumult; thus am I introduced into this 
impenetrable world.® 

3 See Philosophy of Existence. 

° Homo Viator, trans. E. Craufurd (London: Gollancz, 1951), p. 71. 


86 Gabriel Marcel 


But undoubtedly the question will be raised: have I not been 
stressing the impenetrable obscurity of everything that ante- 
dates and encompasses our present being-in-the-world? And 
yet have I not said that mystery lies on the side of light? Is 
there not a contradiction here? Perhaps it would be well at 
this time to dispel a serious ambiguity: It is true that the light 
to which I refer has nothing whatever to do with the clarity 
which characterizes certain simple ideas as conceived, for ex- 
ample, by Descartes. Rather it is a question here of an illumi- 
nating source which, just because it is illuminating, is incapa- 
ble of becoming an idea, or, more exactly, ideate. I use the 
word source in the sense that we speak of a source of inspira- 
tion. But all of this is really unintelligible if we do not inter- 
pose the fundamental act which, in the “Meditation” of 1933, 
I designated by the word “recollection,” taken in its primary 
meaning of silent reflection or concentration of thought. I 
noted then that recollection, which seemed to me to have re- 
ceived too little attention from philosophers, is the act by 
which I recover my being as a unified whole, with this re- 
covery or reprise assuming the aspect of a relaxation or a re- 
lease. “In the depths of recollection,” I wrote, “I take a stand 
with respect to my own life and in some way I withdraw from 
that life, but not at all as a pure epistemological subject. For 
in this withdrawal I bear with me what I am and what my life 
perhaps is not . . . Recollection is probably what is least 
spectacular in the soul. It does not consist in looking at any- 
thing; it is a reprise, an inner reflection, and, I would add, we 
may wonder if it is not the principle of unity, irrepresentable 
in itself, on which the very possibility of memory depends.” 1° 

Returning to what I said earlier concerning the source of 
illumination, I would add that it consists in somehow immers- 
ing one’s self again in this original source beyond all utterance, 
and hence all conceptualization. Yet it is obvious that this act 


Philosophy of Existence, p. 12. 


The Ontological Mystery 87 


cannot provide the occasion for problematizing; rather it cor- 
responds to an advance of the spirit in an exactly inverse way, 
precisely to the extent that it is a relaxation and a release. I 
would still say that only if we always bear in mind that these 
two approaches are the opposite of one another can we truly 
give meaning to the distinction between problem and mys- 
tery. It is necessary to add that recollection, and all that pro- 
ceeds from it, is meta-technical and implies a kind of stripping 
away which is diametrically opposite to all savoir-faire. 

It is in fact the act by which we abandon, as it were, all the 
powers that we possess; and as if such giving up gave rise to 
a certain response, yet one which is not susceptible of being 
anticipated in the sense that we can anticipate the outcome 
of an experiment. Here we should be aware of two kinds of 
anticipation, very different from one another. One is governed 
by the existence of objective relations among phenomena, 
whereas the other arises rather from the trust we place in a 
being or in reality insofar as it can be assimilated to a being. 
What interposes itself in the second case is rightfully called 
freedom. 

Malebranche has already stated that freedom is a mystery, 
and I feel I can revive this formula for my purposes in a sense 
which is certainly not identical with that given the word 
freedom by our seventeenth-century metaphysician. What we 
must acknowledge is that it is useless to wish to place freedom 
in any way among the phenomena that come within the pur- 
view of science, and, for example, to endeavor to establish 
freedom on the relatively indeterminate level discussed by 
certain contemporary physicists. The only approach to free- 
dom is through the reflection of a subject on himself. Properly 
speaking, this reflection allows me to discover—not that I am 
free, or that freedom is an attribute with which I could be in- 
vested—but rather that I must become free—that is, that my 
freedom must be won. Moreover, we must not fail to note 


88 Gabriel Marcel 


the intimate relationship between the two formulas that I have 
successively enunciated: I am not, I have to become; I am not 
free, I have to become free. 

Here we must try to bring together certain points which 
until now have been presented in somewhat random order. 
We must say, because of the irrefutable experience shared 
by all spiritual beings, that recollection as a re-establishment 
of contact with the source emits an illumination; this illumi- 
nation can in no way be confused with the secondary kind 
of clarity which proceeds from what we have called the under- 
standing. It follows on the other hand from all that has been 
said previously, that it would certainly be unwise to identify 
with Being the source itself or the light that it radiates. But 
in return, what seems to conform to the data of this experience 
(which is not technological) is the recognition that recollec- 
tion bestows upon us certain resources for the exploration 
within ourselves that we have to make in the direction of what 
I have called plenitude, or the full life. If this is so, it is un- 
doubtedly because recollection shields or protects us from all 
kinds of distractions that tend to estrange us from our true 
selves and to divert us from the unity which is at once both 
behind and before us. 

All this, however, constitutes a scheme that is far too sim- 
ple to describe the reality that I am endeavoring to explore 
here. There is at the outset a question which inevitably comes 
to mind. What relation does what I have called the “source” 
maintain with this upstream region of myself, the inexplora- 
ble character of which I underscored in Homo Viator? The 
response to this question, to which, I fear I have not given 
sufficient explanation in the past, is very difficult to formu- 
late. Certainly we must admit that it would be possible theo- 
retically to work out our genealogical tree, and that only con- 
tingent obstacles prevent us from doing it. But surely we must 
see that even if we were able to proceed with this fixing of 
guide marks, such an operation would be devoid of all sig- 


The Ontological Mystery 89 


nificance. Here an observation made earlier in this chapter 
that may have appeared as a simple digression takes on its full 
meaning. But even when I limit myself to evoking those of 
my ancestors whom I have known or of whom I have heard, 
the tie that links me to them seems difficult to discern. On the 
one hand, they have not known me as I am or as I have to be. 
And on the other hand, by virtue of a sort of inexorable fatal- 
ity, I myself have certainly in a very large measure misunder- 
stood or misjudged them. Having reached an advanced stage 
of my life, I say, in sorrow tinged with remorse, that in an 
existence such as ours we have remained, each of us, in an 
almost thorough state of “un-knowledge.” But I shall say as 
of now, returning to this matter at a later time, that hope, 
without which there is no life worthy of the name, postulates 
that this frustration on all sides is not final and that we shall 
have to find ourselves again and assemble together in the 
Pleroma which is Being; and, in the line of our destiny, we 
have to say at the same time that the Pleroma does not yet exist 
and that it belongs to all eternity. But I dare say that this re- 
turn to the source, this recollection, is in a way a very humble 
anticipation of that Advent which cannot be imagined and 
toward which we grope our way in an all but complete ob- 
scurity. 

If I have been able to speak of a spiritual itinerary, it is be- 
cause we have to make our way in the world as it is, and this 
progress is unthinkable without a mass of data which are 
gradually objectified, giving rise to the innumerable prob- 
lems we have to solve. It is on practical problems, in the broad 
sense of the word, that I shall lay principal stress in my later 
chapters. But what emerges from all that I have tried to show 
so far is that we are in danger of losing ourselves amidst these 
data of experience and amidst these problems unless we re- 
establish contact by an inverse movement with what might be 
called that milieu that sustains us, again without our having 
the right, as long as we proceed as philosophers, of substitut- 


go Gabriel Marcel 


ing for this very general expression the more precise concepts 
used by theologians. 

These difficult reflections which we all have to shape for 
ourselves, starting from what we are and what it is ours to live 
—these reflections, it is true, I have never dreamed of em- 
bodying as such in my dramatic works. On the other hand, 
there is no doubt that in some manner these works are imbued 
with them. This is especially perceptible in Le Monde Cassé, 
and it was not without reason that this play was published in 
1933 with the “Meditation” to which I have so often referred. 

What I am in a position to say regarding the origin of this 
play amounts to very little and does not relate to its deepest 
significance. I knew a fascinating, much admired young 
woman, married to a man who was not undistinguished, but 
quiet and dull, and to whom it seemed no one paid attention. 
It was on the problem of this man that I first directed my 
thoughts. What could he be experiencing in seeing his wife 
flattered and admired by men who ignored him completely? 
Could we not suppose that this man suffered much more from 
his wounded self-esteem and pride than from his love? It was 
possible that the young woman, discovering the kind of hid- 
den wound her husband suffered, endeavored to help him, to 
bring to him a sort of balm, by making him believe that she 
herself was humiliated by a man who did not respond to the 
love which she had for him. She was thus induced by charity, 
by a false charity, to invent this fable of a rejected love. She 
notices with a kind of horror that, in effect, from the moment 
he believes her humiliated, her husband is drawn closer to her 
and shows her a sort of compassionate tenderness which only 
inspires her with disgust. As a consequence, she has an aver- 
sion for him, and for the first time becomes unfaithful, yielding 
eventually to the entreaties of a young man whom she had 
never taken seriously until then. 

All this, however, belongs to a world which seems to have 
lost its inner unity, its living center—a broken world where 


The Ontological Mystery 9! 


each person is concerned only with himself. Yet, this world is 
not the only world. If the heroine, Christiane, has married 
Laurent, who loved her but whom she did not love, it was the 
result of a cruel disappointment. She herself, in fact, had fallen 
in love with a childhood friend, Jacques, and at the moment 
when she was going to declare her love to him, he had in- 
formed her that he was going to take monastic vows. This 
news chilled her. Life lost all significance for her, and hoping 
for nothing more, she thought that she might just as well give 
a little happiness to Laurent, who loved her, by consenting 
to marry him. But the events which unfolded subsequently 
now seem to her to demonstrate that in getting married under 
these conditions she had committed a sinful mistake. She is 
now distressed, and begins to wonder if she is going to leave 
her husband and live with this young lover whom she cannot 
take seriously. It is at this moment that the other world, the 
unbroken world, is recalled to her; and with this new stroke 
her confusion is increased. She has learned that Jacques, with 
whom it seemed to her that she would have known true hap- 
piness, has died in his monastery. 

It is at this point that the monk’s sister, whom Christiane 
had known formerly and for whom she felt no particular 
affection, comes to reveal to her that she had recovered the 
intimate notes that the monk wrote in his cell. As a conse- 
quence of a dream, he seemed to have understood too late 
the love that Christiane had felt for him and at the same time 
the harm he had done her in choosing the monastic life. From 
then on he felt tragically responsible for her and prayed that 
she would not succumb to the temptation of committing sui- 
cide, as a friend of hers, a woman of “the broken world,” had 
recently done. Christiane is overwhelmed by this revelation. 
She starts by rebelling; but little by little it is as if a light enters 
her soul: thus in the invisible world a communion exists that 
she had never suspected. And immediately, as she makes the 
discovery that in a mysterious way she participates in this 


92 Gabriel Marcel 


other world which had been Jacques’, she comes to take a 
stand regarding her life and to condemn it. But at the same 
time she cannot continue to go on living the lie in which she 
has imprisoned herself through her infidelity. She feels she 
must reveal the truth to her husband and by that means re- 
new or tighten the sacred bond which was on the point of 
breaking. Laurent staggers under the weight of this revelation. 
He even starts by revolting and then he is won over by the 
spirit of truth which has taken hold of Christiane; and at least 
during a brief moment—as had happened to Roger and Clare 
at the end of Le Quatuor—these two human beings feel as one. 
With this instantaneous realization the work ends, and cer- 
tainly nothing guarantees that this accord will last. But at least 
they will, at the apex of their life, have achieved true unity: 
they will have freed themselves from the broken world. 

This entire ending has been challenged and disputed. Cer- 
tain critics have spoken of a deus ex machina and of some- 
thing contrived. I feel, however, that in principle I had the 
right to end the play in this way, because experience has 
shown irrefutably, and no doubt much more often than is 
commonly believed—that following an encounter, a light may 
arise in a soul and at the same time that soul may in turn be- 
come illuminating. In fact, I met a Hungarian of the Benedic- 
tine Order who, apropos of this play, told me that he had 
known a strikingly similar case. 

Naturally, one can object that what counts is plausibility; 
and it is in fact true that in the perspective of Le Monde cassé 
this plausibility is lacking. But in response to this objection 
we must reply, it seems to me, that in the world as it is actually 
given to us, this break—to which I shall refer again—is not 
radical, and the very fact of interrogating one’s self concern- 
ing Being, of putting one’s self in the presence of the mystery 
of Being, is sufficient to show it. The unforgivable mistake 
would be to introduce a contrivance—to utilize in some way 
what we may call the supernatural—as a device for resolving 


The Ontological Mystery 93 


the tragic problems posed for man today. But I will have to 
show in later chapters that the denouement of Le Monde 
cassé constitutes an exception among my works and that very 
often the final stress is put rather on the interrogative note. 
This latter is, moreover, tied to an ambiguity the principle of 
which resides in the very structure of our being. But there is 
the further danger in this domain of making oneself a prisoner 
of a formula. My persistent effort has, perhaps more than any- 
thing else, consisted in struggling against the temptation of any 
formula whatsoever, and this in the name of human experi- 
ence which we must confront in all its complexity, aware of 
the incessant interplay of light and shadow suffusing the whole 
of our existence. 


VI < 


The Self and Ambiguity 


He traveled thus far, we should, it seems to me, 
ask ourselves how near we have come to the goal I 
set for myself at the beginning. In stressing, as I have done, 
the mystery of Being and the positive value of recollection, 
we may ask whether or not we are in a position to see more 
clearly the essential nature of what we call human dignity. At 
firs ce, it seems c least make a first discovery: a 


on capable of communing- -with himsetfa 
ing contact with an invisible and limitless reality thereby re- 
veals himself capable of transcending the spontaneous course 
of life. But here, are we not simply following Pascal when 
he says: “All the dignity of man consists in thought. Thought 
is therefore by its nature a wonderful and incomparable 
thing.” He adds immediately, however: “It must have strange 
defects to be contemptible. In fact, its magnitude is such that 
nothing is more ridiculous. How great it is in its nature! How 
vile it is in its defects!” 1 This disparaging remark, indicating 
what thought can and does become, considerably limits the 
significance of Pascal’s first proposition. Today, especially, 
in the light of the development of modern psychology, we are 
inclined, generally speaking, not so much to overrate thought 
as an invaluable privilege, as to emphasize the fact that it exists, 
1 Pensées, ed. Leon Brunschvig, 3 vols., 1904, p. 496. 
94 


The Self and Ambiguity 95 


first of all, as a function to insure the adaptation of an indi- 
vidual to his natural and social milieus—in short, to reduce it 
to a system of delicate mechanisms which, at times, may fail 
to work properly, and thus may defeat their purpose. Under 
these circumstances, if we speak here of transcendence, it is 
in the very limited sense, and one may doubt that in such a 
perspective it is possible to repeat that all the dignity of man 
consists in thought. 

On the other hand, what we have said of recollection shows 
distinctly that this can in no way be reduced to thought as 
mechanism. We have seen that it is a source of thought rather 
than thought itself. It implies the freedom with which I dis- 
engage myself and withdraw from my own life in order to 
be able to evaluate it and even eventually to censure it. But, 
at the same time, it becomes possible for me to start off again 
in another direction, guided by this light which has been be- 
stowed upon me I do not know by whom. Indeed, I am not 
even sure that the question “by whom?” may have a precise 
meaning here. It seems rather that this light shines through the 
world of the ‘“who’s” and “what’s” in the midst of which I 
am accustomed to move and to which I constantly refer when, 
for example, I ask myself to whom a particular thing belongs, 
who said this or wrote that letter, and so on . . . Must we 
then speak of impersonality? I think, rather, that a subtle dis- 
tinction must be made between the impersonal and the supra- 
personal. A law is impersonal; we might term it “contents”; it 
is a “what,” a “something.” But the light we have spoken of, 
to the extent that it lights the different “contents,” whatever 
they may be, reveals that it is not of the same nature. To put 
it differently, we may say that it cannot be assimilated to a con- 
cept or to anything that can be conceptualized. 

We could perhaps even at this point answer the question I 
asked at the beginning of this chapter by saying that man’s 
essential characteristic seems to be his ability to let himself 
be penetrated by this supra-personal light, an ability which 


96 Gabriel Marcel 


is evidently linked in some way to what we call human dig- 
nity. 

However, I do not think that this answer can be considered 
final. The answer we have here is oversimplified; it does not 
take into account the concrete circumstances in which life 
unfolds. The truth is, as I pointed out at the end of my last 
chapter, that we are obliged to focus our attention on the 
obstacles encountered by what we may call the will to com- 
mune, or, using a different language but one homologous to 
the preceding, on all that contributes not only to separate us 
from Being, but even to make the quest for Being appear 
illusory and, finally, meaningless. We could at this juncture 
refer to the notion of alienation which Marx, following Hegel, 
strongly emphasized, but in a particular context, and un- 
doubtedly without realizing its full import (while Hegel, on 
the contrary, was fully aware of it). 

Only a close scrutiny of alienation can enable us to resist 
the temptation of the philosophy of idealism to which so many 
have yielded who are prone to substitute for the study of man 
as he actually is elaborations on what he should be, or on the 
too-flattering self-portrait he is likely to draw when his atten- 
tion is focused on an essence imprudently dissociated from the 
existential context. 

As I say this, I wish to point out that I am far from endorsing 
existentialism as defined by Sartre; besides, this extreme exis- 
tentialism I have never accepted. All I wish to do is to assert 
the rights of a phenomenology in the light of which the pri- 
macy of experience over what could be called pure thought 
must be rigorously preserved. 

Surely it is not a coincidence that less than a year after at- 
tempting to define what I called the “approaches” to the on- 
tological mystery I felt the need of concentrating my thought 
on having. It was, however, ten years earlier, in the Meta- 
physical Journal of March 16, 1923, that I mentioned for the 
first time how important it was to make a distinction between 


The Self and Ambiguity 97 


what one has and what one is. “Only,” I wrote, “it is exceed- 
ingly difficult to give it the form of a concept, and yet this 
should be possible.” And I continued: 


What one has is seemingly, to a certain extent, exterior to oneself. And 
yet this exteriority is not absolute. In principle, one bas things, or what 
can be assimilated to things, and in the precise measure in which this 
assimilation is possible. I can have, strictly speaking, only some thing 
whose existence is to a certain extent independent of myself. In other 
words, what I have can be added to myself. Moreover, the fact of its 
being possessed by me can be added to other properties, other quali- 
ties, and so on . . . belonging to the thing I have. I have only what 
I can, in some way and within certain limits, make use of, in other 
words insofar as I can be considered a power, a being endowed with 
powers.” 


This introductory text was to be placed at the beginning of 
a “brief study of a phenomenology of the having.” But I was 
also to be influenced, though to what degree I would not be 
able to say today, by at least a partial reading of the work of 
the German philosopher Gunther Stern, known today by the 
name of Gunther Anders. The book, entitled Uber das Haben, 
was published in Bonn in 1928.° 

It is a fact, however, that all my thoughts on having origi- 
nated from those I had previously pursued on Incarnation. It 
seemed to me that here the fundamental fact was what could 
be called “attachment” to the body proper. In this connection 
we may consider the French phrase: “tenir à ce qu’on possède” 
(to be attached to one’s possessions). If someone snatches an 
object from us to which we are attached because it belongs 
to us, we feel as if we were physically injured. But, at the same 
time, this shows how dependent we are on what we possess. 
I wrote somewhere: “Nos possessions nous dévorent” (“We 
are devoured by our possessions”). This truth, if I am not mis- 


2 Metaphysical Journal, p. 311. 
*Gunther Stern, Uber das Haben: sieben Kapitel zur Ontologie der 
Erkenntnis (Bonn: F. Cohen, 1928). 


08 Gabriel Marcel 


taken, has been very forcefully expressed by Henry James in 
The Spoils of Poynton. 

In my Phénoménologie de P Avoir, I stressed certain aspects 
of the subject which are still important to me today: first, what 
I called a repressed dynamism. I would perhaps express my- 
self somewhat differently now. To say I possess this particular 
object is to imply that I can make use of it, lend it, give it, or, 
as the case may be, destroy it, without anyone having—I do 
not stay the physical power, but the right to stop me. How- 
ever, the word “repressed” no longer seems to me adequate. 
The truth is that I hold in reserve, as it were, these possible 
actions which perhaps I shall not perform. The having falls 
here under the category of property, but it is obvious that it 
is more comprehensive than property, and it may be in this 
particular respect that the philosopher is more directly con- 
cerned. Here again, reference to the body is extremely in- 
structive. If I say I have a nose or eyes, it is apparent at once 
that the word “possession” very inadequately expresses what 
I mean. Yet, as I have indicated, it seems that to this having, 
which is perhaps impossible to define, every sort of posses- 
sion may be related. Here is a paradox which cannot be too 
strongly emphasized: something possessed is related in some 
manner to a having that cannot itself be defined in terms of 
possession. It is, moreover, exactly in this way that any instru- 
ment appears as the extension of a power which is not itself 
instrumental in the strictest sense of the word. 

Nevertheless, it may not be amiss to point out that, in a cer- 
tain context, the subject can be tempted to treat his body as 
an object he can use freely. To understand this, one can take 
as an example the emancipated girl who tells her parents that 
her body belongs to her, that she can do what she pleases with 
it. But in this case we should not overlook the fact that it is 
actually for herself that she wants her freedom, her body being 
for her a kind of materialized equivalent of herself. Experience 
may show her—and in many ways—that this freedom has 


The Self and Ambiguity 99 


limits she did not suspect, that the body can be only imper- 
fectly controlled, if, for example, she finds herself pregnant. 

These remarks are intended to serve as a background for 
what follows. I wish now to try to clarify my meaning when 
I state that I have an idea or that I have a feeling. It seems 
at first that there is nothing here but darkness and confusion, 
or, to put it more exactly, that we are confronted with a very 
wide keyboard. At one end of this keyboard we find the im- 
pression or the idea which takes possession of us at a given 
moment, but which will be replaced by another idea or an- 
other impression, this change being effected at the surface of 
ourselves, and, it would seem, without anything like an im- 
plantation taking place. It is evident that in this extreme case 
the word “having” becomes void of any precise meaning. 

At the other end of this keyboard, we shall find, for ex- 
ample, the fact of having a conviction (moral, religious, or 
political). This conviction may appear to me as being consub- 
stantial with myself, as being part of myself. But then, should 
we not ask ourselves if having does not tend to pass into being. 
The answer is not simple, and I am not sure that in the past 
I have made myself sufficiently clear on this point. I com- 
mented some time ago that having is something which can 
be exposed, a remark which can be applied either to the con- 
viction or to the object possessed. But I can expose only that 
which, in a certain manner, is or can become exterior to me. 
It may happen, moreover, that an idea I considered mine, once 
it is exposed, becomes detached from me, as it were. It could 
also be said figuratively that it becomes devitalized, or loses 
its bloom and withers. Thus I find that this idea did not have 
as firm, as intimate, a hold on me as I had thought before I 
tried to propose it to others. It proved that in some way it can 
be detached, that it can fall from me as a leaf falls from a tree. 

This leads us to a recognition of the vast difference between 
the exposable idea or conviction, and belief in the truest sense, 
which can only be attested, that is, can hardly be anything 


100 Gabriel Marcel 


but someone’s testimony. Here having seems really to pass 
into being. But this is true only in its extreme form, in the 
person who lives and radiates his belief, that is to say, above 
all, in the saint. However, it is no less evident that in the 
ordinary and imperfect believer this faith of which, if he is 
sincere, he wishes to be the living incarnation, is covered, as 
it were, by an overgrowth of accepted opinions, prejudices, 
habits, which he may be said to possess. And if I have said 
that no one of us knows exactly and cannot know what he 
believes, it is precisely that what is given to his “knowing 
consciousness,” if I may use this term, is precisely that com- 
bination of elements which can be exposed or shown, but 
nevertheless remains truly exterior to him, as I have said. His 
faith he will know only by the manner in which he will be 
brought to acknowledge that he does attest it. Yet the truth 
is still a great deal more complex. Actually it may happen that 
in some particular cases he discovers that, through weakness 
or cowardice, he is incapable of attesting it. But if this dis- 
covery of his inadequacy affects him deeply and painfully, it 
proves to him, none the less, the reality of his belief, although 
his testimony remains inarticulate, as it were, and cannot be 
conveyed to others. 

It is quite clear, however, that when it comes to attesting 
one’s faith, this inadequacy or imperfection is generally found 
in those who consider themselves, or are considered, believers, 
the word “believer” not necessarily being taken in a purely 
religious sense. Here again I shall quote the words of a char- 
acter in L’Emissaire, Antoine Sorgue, who, though not my 
mouthpiece, is one of those who show the greatest awareness 
of the fundamental situation which is our concern. 


Antoine. Yes and no, Sylvie, this is the only answer when we ourselves 
are concerned: we believe and we do not believe, we love and we 
do not love, we are and we are not. But if this is so, it is because 
we are heading toward a goal which at the same time we see and 
we do not see.* 


“Vers un autre royaume, p. 108. 


The Self and Ambiguity 101 


These words, which could serve as an epigraph to these 
lectures, and to all my work for that matter, take their full 
meaning in the light of these reflections on having, and still 
more precisely from the fact that having, to the extent that it 
depends upon Incarnation, cannot in any way be set up as an 
absolute or be considered sufficient in itself. 

Yet it is necessary to carry our analysis one step further 
and, as we may already have surmised on our way, to come to 
the consideration of the self and of the essential ambiguity 
which detracts from its purity, so to speak. The transition 
can be made easily here by referring to my previous remarks 
on the attachment to oneself which is implied in any affirma- 
tion of having as such. 

Modern idealism, particularly in Fichte and the Romanti- 
cists, has, it is true, seen in the self the thetic, and consequently 
the creative, principle par excellence. But for that it was nec- 
essary, I might say, to “transcendentalize” the self, that is, to 
substitute for the empirical self a unifying, universal principle. 
And then only by dialectical feats can one attempt to extract 
the empirical self from the absolute or merely transcendental 
self. In the same way one will have to stress, above all, the 
limitations inherent in the empirical self considered as such. 
Thus will be brought to light the opposition between the two 
principles which cannot be designated by the same word, moi 
(self), without creating the most dangerous confusion. This 
is sufficient to explain the fact that after the Romanticists— 
and notably in Hegel—the idea of the absolute moi was prac- 
tically discarded. 

As far as I am concerned, my life experience and the reflec- 
tions to which it led me, have made me emphasize more and 
more that the moi serves much more as a shutter (as in a cam- 
era) than as a true creative principle. At the most elementary 
level, I shall refer to the English word “self-conscious,” in 
its pejorative connotation which the French conscient de soi, 
does not have, any more than the German selbstbewusst. The 
English word indicates as strongly as possible the fact that 


102 Gabriel Marcel 


the self, when it is, as it were, encumbered with itself, stands 
as a screen between one’s consciousness and others. More 
precisely, the subject is as though paralyzed by the often 
quite false picture he imagines others have of him. It is hardly 
necessary to indicate that this is one of the roots of timidity. 
If we follow this observation, we see clearly how indispensable 
it is to distinguish between “I” which, it may be noted, can- 
not be treated as a substantive, and “myself” or “the self” 
which supposes a certain reflection, taken in a kind of optic 
sense. We must also notice that the current use of the Latin 
word “ego” in English philosophical language has the serious 
disadvantage of omitting or of precluding this important dis- 
tinction. As I wrote in Homo Viator’ we shall have to see 
in what I call moi (myself) an emphasis which I give, not to 
my entire experience, but to that portion or aspect of my ex- 
perience I mean particularly to protect from a certain attack 
or infraction which may jeopardize it. In this sense, it has 
often been pointed out, and rightly so, that it is impossible 
to assign precise limits to this moi. I added that this moi can- 
not be separated from here, now, and I said I could not see 
how a being for whom there would be neither here nor now 
could still appear to himself as moi. I added that under these 
conditions the emphasis I mentioned before should tend to 
hold itself as an enclave, but a moving and vulnerable en- 
clave: an enclosure which is alive; and, to justify this term, 
I referred to the so far unsurpassed portrait of the egoist in 
Meredith’s novel of that title. Today, however, I wonder if, 
in the text I just referred to, I should not have dwelt more 
than I did on the obturating capacity of this enclave. The 
egotist, or, in the most precise sense of the word, the egoist, 
like Willoughby, is rendered incapable of seeing what pre- 
cisely his moi hides from him. Another person counts for him 
only in relation to this moi, insofar as he appreciates it, re- 
spects it, admires it, and so on . . . We may recall the part 
5 See pp. 13-28. 


The Self and Ambiguity 103 
played in the novel by Laetitia Dale. Willoughby needs her 


to the extent that she brings to him the constant confirmation 
of, shall we say, his own judgment of himself. This may be 
too intellectual a way of describing a relation to oneself which 
is more akin to self-enjoyment. Yet it may be necessary to 
add that along with this self-enjoyment there is very often 
a gnawing anxiety which, of course, one refuses to acknowl- 
edge, although it remains present as a secret threat to be 
warded off at any cost. 

Here we find again our previous reflections on having—at 
least where having is, properly speaking, possession. I would 
note in passing that in French and also, it seems, in English, 
this word can be both active and passive, and this seems to me 
very revealing. In a sense it is true to say that to possess is to 
be possessed, precisely because possession is not free from a 
secret anxiety the nature of which is not fundamentally dif- 
ferent, it seems, from the anxiety we find in the egoist as por- 
trayed in the fullest sense by Meredith. Besides, it is evident 
that egoism (selfishness) takes innumerable forms, and it is 
only when carried to the extreme that it becomes, properly 
speaking, egotism. 

All these observations will appear of the greatest importance 
to anyone who tries to probe the intersubjective relations and 
go to their very root. Here we are at the very center of the 
area I have tried to explore as a dramatist, although at the out- 
set I did not make any attempt to state precisely the general 
philosophical meaning of the concrete cases which fell under 
my mental gaze. 

Following the method I used in my earlier chapters, I pro- 
pose to examine those of my plays which seem to me today 
the most significant in the light of the foregoing observations. 
The case I treated in La Chapelle ardente is, if not the sim- 
plest, at any rate the clearest, the least subject to controversy, 
but not the least painful. I shall describe it here from the point 
of view of the central character; it goes without saying that 


104 Gabriel Marcel 


other descriptions are possible when the other three characters 
are considered. 

The action takes place at the end of the first World War in 
a country house where Aline Fortier lives with her husband, 
Colonel Octave Fortier, a career officer who resigned his com- 
mission after the signing of the peace treaty. Their only son, 
Raymond, was killed at the front, and Aline thinks her hus- 
band is to a certain degree responsible for his death. In the first 
place, he more or less urged him to enlist. Furthermore, he 
took him into his own regiment for officer’s training and did 
not object to his being sent on the dangerous mission in which 
he met his death. Aline’s feelings for her husband are there- 
fore a mixture of resentment and horror. Besides, she says, 
he enjoyed war, which she herself considers inexcusable 
butchery. The Fortiers have taken into their home Mireille 
Pradole, Raymond’s fiancée, who is an orphan. It is around 
the girl’s destiny that the play revolves. Aline regards her as 
a reminder of her son whom she idolized and now fairly wor- 
ships. She could not bear the idea of Mireille’s loving another 
man. For her this would be worse than a betrayal, an intoler- 
able lesion. We find here what I said previously about the 
“enclave”—vulnerable, like an open wound. Raymond, the 
son she worships and whose loss leaves her all the more dis- 
consolate since she has no religious beliefs and cannot imagine 
any after-life for him except in herself, is, I might say, the most 
essential part of her moi, though she is unable to realize it. 
She is not aware of the fact that for the real individual that 
was Raymond she substituted a kind of idol which is one with 
herself. By no means should Mireille of her own free will 
destroy this idol into which she has been incorporated by 
Aline. 

Now it so happens that on a neighboring estate lives a hand- 
some young man just out of the army. He meets Mireille 
on the tennis court and is visibly attracted by her. For Aline 
he immediately represents a threat to be warded off. But of 


The Self and Ambiguity 105 


course nothing would be gained if Mireille had to give him 
up and make a sacrifice. She must be persuaded that she is not 
in love with him. And to this end Aline’s actions will be di- 
rected. Subtly she will try to convince Mireille that, being 
the girl she is, and, moreover, the one who was going to share 
the life of a man such as Raymond, she cannot seriously con- 
sider marrying this playboy. Here Aline takes advantage of 
the fact that Mireille admires her and would not, for anything 
in the world, disappoint one she calls “mother.” Yet, at the 
same time, something in Mireille’s soul desperately struggles 
against this powerful influence on her of a person made tyran- 
nical because she is possessed by one idea, one love. 

Aline realizes, however, that in spite of everything Mireille 
will have to make a new start in life. Still, it must be with a 
man who cannot in any way compare with Raymond as he 
was in real life, a man who, in short, will not overshadow or 
destroy the idol. Now it happens that Colonel Fortier has a 
nephew, André, a sickly boy who suffers from a heart ailment 
and for that reason was declared unfit for military service. 
He feels inferior, and considers himself worthless. He loves 
Mireille, but without hope, and he has never dared confess 
his love to her. Aline learns that, unknown to him, his con- 
dition has been found hopeless by the cardiologist he has just 
come to consult once more. From now on, an idea takes shape 
in her, that of suggesting to Mireille a marriage which would 
be an act of charity, of pure sacrifice, and which would not 
give offense to Raymond’s image. Still she must proceed in 
such a way that Mireille, who has her pride, will think that 
this is a free act, an act which she can regard as absolutely true 
to the best in herself. She must not think that she acted to 
please Aline. In other words, the question for Aline will be to 
influence, by clever maneuvering, another’s freedom, but in 
such a way as to make this freedom appear to have been en- 
tirely preserved. 

But reality is still more complex: for Aline cannot let herself 


106 Gabriel Marcel 


be made aware of exercising an influence. She must be made 
to imagine that Mireille herself contemplates this marriage out 
of pity after she has turned away from the other man, the one 
Aline does not want. Thus dishonesty is the mainspring of the 
action, but, as frequently or always happens, it is not con- 
scious of itself; it can regard itself as sincerity. Incidentally, 
I may say that La Chapelle ardente anticipates the analyses 
of bad faith and self-deception which Sartre was to develop 
with remarkable success twenty years later in Being and Noth- 
ingness.® 

I shall leave aside here the ending of the play, an ending 
which is, in fact, no conclusion. For to me there could be no 
question of ending it with a breaking off, a death or a suicide. 
As in almost all of my plays, the denouement consists in the 
resolution of a certain significant accord which may be a dis- 
sonance. Here André and Mireille are married. They experi- 
ence a weak kind of intimacy which may appear, at least to 
André, as happiness. But Aline is always present and manages 
to do evil when she wants to do good, but good according to 
her own standards. Mireille, who in retrospect sees clearly, 
says some very harsh words to her and Aline goes away. But 
if she is driven to desperation, won’t she be tempted to take 
her own life? This would be dreadful and must be avoided 
at all costs. They call her back, knowing that they will never 
be able to get rid of her. “Do you really think she is a wicked 
woman?” André asks Mireille. And she answers: “No, she is 
a woman to be pitied.” 

In this play, as in most of the others, I have sought to intro- 
duce a maximum of lucidity and at the same time a maximum 
of compassion. I think as Mireille does when she regains her 
composure: Aline is not a wicked woman, she has no ill will, 
but all her acts are governed by the kind of possession I men- 


ê Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenologi- 
cal Ontology. Translated and with introduction by H. E. Barnes (New 
York: Philosophical Library, 1956). 


The Self and Ambiguity 107 


tioned before. And I should add that, in her, suffering, far 
from having a purifying influence, has literally intoxicated 
her. There is not, I think, a more unsound idea than that often 
developed by authors of edifying treatises—the idea that suf- 
fering may be regarded as good in itself. I should be more 
inclined to say that, on the contrary, it is bad in principle, 
although the human soul, under certain favorable conditions, 
when it has created around itself the appropriate spiritual cli- 
mate, can freely—I mean by a free act—transmute this suf- 
fering not exactly into something good, but into a principle 
capable of radiating love, hope, and charity. Yet it is neces- 
sary that the suffering soul, through suffering itself, should 
open itself up more to others, instead of closing in upon itself 
and its wound. This is precisely what a person like Aline can- 
not do. Can we blame her? Must we say, on the contrary, that 
grace was denied her? But, as I shall have occasion to repeat 
later on, it does not seem possible to think of grace without 
reference to a certain breadth and inner readiness. It may be, 
therefore, that Aline is in some way responsible for this lack 
or this dispossession. But who among us could say for sure? 
We have to understand and pity her rather than judge her. 

This play, written shortly after the end of the first World 
War and without reference to any philosophical idea, I have 
analyzed at length to show that it deals with the most funda- 
mental problems. These cannot be solved by the dramatist, 
however. The very idea of a solution in this perspective seems 
absurd. The question is rather to hold up to the spectator a 
sort of magic mirror in which he finds his own problems, his 
own difficulties, with the result that through the mediation 
of the drama itself there will emerge this awareness which, 
most of the time, remains in us as though benumbed and in- 
articulate. 

This applies to all my dramatic works, in particular to 
such plays as Un Homme de Dieu and Le Chemin de créte 
(Ariadne in the English version). But in these two works, 


108 Gabriel Marcel 


ambiguity will be much more clearly perceptible than in La 
Chappelle ardente, though here, too, its presence is almost 
constantly felt in the discrepancy between what the characters 
really are and the idea of themselves which they or their own 
interests present to them. 

The main character of Un Homme de Dieu is a Protestant 
minister, Claude Lemoine. Twenty years earlier, when he lived 
in a village in the Ardèche, his wife Edmée confessed to him 
that she had been unfaithful to him. Her lover, a certain 
Michel Sandier, is actually the father of Osmonde, whom 
Claude believed to be his legitimate child. Claude forgave his 
wife, and life followed its normal, monotonous course, first 
in an industrial town of northern France, later in Paris. An 
unexpected turn of events is going to change the situation: 
The former lover, Michel Sandier, whom the Lemoines had 
lost sight of, suffers from an incurable disease, and, through 
his physician, Claude’s brother, asks to see his daughter once 
more before he dies. Edmée’s immediate and spontaneous reac- 
tion is that they must refuse. (Osmonde, of course, does not 
know the truth.) Claude, on the contrary, feels there would 
be a certain cowardice in opposing a request which is, after all, 
legitimate. Wouldn’t such refusal show that the past is not 
entirely forgotten? But Edmée, as woman, is hurt by this 
scruple or by this magnanimous attitude. It seems to her that 
Claude does not act as a man would act, but as someone to 
whom charity is a profession. And, she asks herself, has he 
ever been a real man? Thus, once again, the question is raised 
of the value of this forgiveness which, it now seems to her, 
Claude had managed to make so oppressive to her. She recalls 
that before her confession of infidelity Claude had had reli- 
gious doubts which had seemed afterward to disappear. If his 
love had been of a sensual kind, could he have shown himself 
so noble? Perhaps his forgiving her had been only a profes- 
sional act, void of substance, which at the same time gave him 
the comfortable feeling that he had chosen the right calling. 


The Self and Ambiguity 109 


Thus, the whole past is made to unfold again, as it were, by 
the situation Claude and Edmée have to face today. Nor is this 
all. In the course of the scene in which she is again face to face 
with her former lover, Edmée herself will be led to ask her- 
self for what reasons she was compelled to confess her guilt 
to her husband. With extraordinary lucidity, Michel, who 
seems to have passed from this life already, forces her to ask 
herself if she did not act out of sheer cowardice, for he had 
asked her to go away with him. Was it not true that she was 
afraid of all the risks involved and that she had escaped through 
confession because she knew that Claude, being the man he 
was, would forgive her, and that with his forgiveness she could 
find again the kind of moral comfort so necessary to her? 

Thus, by raising the question of their own motives and of 
the meaning of their acts in the past, Claude and Edmée come 
to destroy each other, and this destruction will not be with- 
out consequences for others. Their daughter, Osmonde, is 
in love with a much older man, who lives in the same house 
and whose children she sometimes takes care of, since his wife 
is in an insane asylum. Claude will eventually tell her the 
truth about her birth, but under circumstances which will 
lead the girl to question, in her turn, the value of his acts. 
Reacting against this impure combination of virtues, or mock- 
virtues, and cowardice, Osmonde will decide to serve as gov- 
erness for the children of the man who loves her but who 
has scruples regarding their relationship. In fact, she will de- 
cide to give herself to him and thus break away from all the 
compromises that go with conventionality. 

But the essential element of the drama is the part played 
in it by the inquiring mind. Claude, in particular, cannot know 
for sure what took place in him or for him when he forgave 
his wife twenty years before, and perhaps Edmée’s mistake 
lies in the fact that, yielding to a need springing from her 
ego, that avid and vulnerable ego I spoke of before, she ques- 
tions again the value of Claude’s forgiveness. And today, think- 


110 Gabriel Marcel 


ing again of this play I wrote forty years ago—one that had 
the greatest number of performances of all my plays in France 
and abroad—I can add something I certainly was not aware 
of when I wrote the play: Claude’s forgiving his wife was 
an act which had real meaning and value only at the time it 
was performed, aside from all the questions that might later 
be raised about it. Furthermore, is it not only useless but even 
wrong to question, twenty years after the event, the motives 
of an act which is so far removed from both husband and 
wife? In the final scene—the one I like best, perhaps—both 
Claude and Edmée come to acknowledge that they no longer 
know if they really loved each other, or what their love was 
like, or what had caused it. For one brief moment Claude 
is tempted to commit suicide. But no, he must not forget that 
good people who in no way suspect what he is going through 
and naively look upon him as a saint, need him, and that, in 
fact, he has been and will continue to be of real service to 
them. This, however, is only a sort of pragmatic consolation 
with which the man of God he is—despite everything—can- 
not be entirely satisfied. The only recourse left to him is 
prayer, the calling upon Him who knows him as he is, while he 
himself, groping his way through life, has always misjudged 
himself or seen himself as he is not. 

Here again there is evidence of anticipation in relation to 
everything which, later on, was to find articulate expression 
at the level of pure thought. Needless to say, all this can be 
clarified a posteriori by views on the ontological mystery; yet 
at the same time it gives content and substance to what, con- 
sidered in itself, might seem only idle speculation. It is in fact 
much more than that. It is the seal of reflection on an experi- 
ence of a truly unusual type, since it is lived only through 
imaginary characters, but, let it be emphasized again, without 
their owing anything to preconceived ideas they would after- 
ward come to embody. If this experience proved to be rich 


The Self and Ambiguity III 


in philosophical developments, it is, I am sure, precisely be- 
cause of this lack of preconceived ideas. 

This applies specifically to Le Chemin de crête, undoubt- 
edly the most important of the three plays I have under- 
taken to discuss here. In it, circumstances and situations play 
a most important role, which leads us to what seems to me a 
highly significant observation: While in the philosophies of the 
classical type—Plato’s or Berkeley’s, for example—the dia- 
logue was between persons with only slightly individualized 
characters, it is perfectly understandable that, in an existential 
philosophy, the process should be reversed and that in a theater 
which is, so to speak, the other side of this philosophy, indi- 
vidualization should be stressed, not only in the characters 
but also in the situations in which they are involved. Lacking 
this, we should remain in the abstract in which existential 
thought can have no place. 

I shall limit myself here to a summary of Le Chemin de 
créte, though the play actually is extremely complex. 

Ariane Leprieur’s poor health has obliged her to spend many 
years of her life in the mountains. But she insists that her hus- 
band Jérome should not sacrifice himself any longer and should 
return to Paris to resume his activities as a music critic. The 
relations between the two are all the more involved since 
Ariane is wealthy, while Jérome has no money of his own. 
He depends on her financially, a position he finds difficult 
to bear, though his wife strives to convince him that she is 
only too happy to make life easier for him. In Paris, Jérome 
has an affair with Violette Masargue, a young musician who 
has already been unhappy in love. Ariane learns of this affair 
and decides to go and spend a few months in Paris. She wants 
to get acquainted with Violette and asks her to give her a 
few piano lessons. She tells her that she knows everything, 
that she has no grudge either against her or against Jérome, 
but that Jérome must be kept ignorant of the fact that his 


112 Gabriel Marcel 


wife has learned of the affair; she is sure he could not bear 
the thought and perhaps would be driven to a desperate deci- 
sion. A strange intimacy, therefore, is going to bring the two 
women together which Jérome will find surprising and irritat- 
ing. What, then, is Ariane’s intention? Why this forgiving 
attitude and, at the same time, this desire for secrecy? Isn’t 
there something disturbing and impure in the impassioned 
interest she takes in her husband’s mistress? Jérome, exasper- 
ated, declares he has made up his mind to get a divorce and 
marry Violette. But the latter, who has developed a sincere 
affection for Ariane, an affection not unmixed with a feeling 
of remorse and anxiety, feels it would be gross treason to 
steal her husband. She tells Ariane in confidence what Jérome’s 
intentions are and asks her what she should do. After paus- 
ing to reflect a moment, Ariane seems to accept calmly—or 
with resignation—the idea of a divorce. Nevertheless, what 
she will tell Violette from now on seems precisely intended 
to dissuade her from the project. She points out to her that 
Jérome is poor; she, Violette, has no money and has a child 
to bring up. Will Jérome, who likes luxury, be satisfied with 
a precarious existence? Ariane ends by suggesting that Violette 
permit her to help the couple financially, but without Jérome’s 
knowing anything about it, since his pride would not allow 
him to accept such an arrangement. But all the vague sus- 
picions Violette had entertained about Ariane are now sud- 
denly confirmed, and she explodes. It becomes obvious to her 
that Ariane has treacherously—and purposely—used every 
means at her disposal to destroy her relationship with Jérome. 
Ariane does not answer these accusations, but a little later she 
simply observes that, if she comes to die, Violette should know 
she forgave her this outburst. Is she sincere? Are Violette’s 
accusations justified? How is one to know? However, at the 
end of the play, and without my going into the details, Ariane 
will also come to have doubts about herself. She will see that 
she cannot be entirely sure of her real motives. In other words, 


The Self and Ambiguity 113 


she will become aware of this ambiguity which has been 
gradually disclosed to the spectator. However, unlike Claude 
Lemoine, she has no religious faith; her only recourse will be 
that of so many others—to write a diary which will probably 
be published and may be fairly successful. Yet, at the same 
time, she has no illusions about the value of such an escape: 
for literature is only one way of escaping, and, in this, this 
tragedy of ambiguity ends with the same appeal as Un Homme 
de Dieu—an inarticulate cry for help but with no faith to 
guide it. 

This play is undoubtedly one of the most somber I have ever 
written, a fact which may have been surprising to some, since 
it came several years after my conversion to Catholicism, But 
I have never truly admitted that this conversion should entail 
the obligation to close each of my works with what I might 
call an orthodox ending. To my way of thinking, this would 
be nothing but deception. The fact of belonging to the Catho- 
lic Church, or to any church, does not—indeed, should not— 
prevent us from seeking to understand, with a lucidity which 
must never exclude compassion, how life appears to those who 
are enlightened by no belief of a transcendental nature. It is 
for this very reason that I have never agreed to be labeled a 
Catholic philosopher or a Catholic writer, for to accept a label 
of this kind is, I fear, to pledge oneself, in the name of mis- 
directed proselytizing, to something false, incompatible with 
that intellectual honesty which has constantly appeared to me 
as the first duty, not only of the philosopher—which goes 
without saying—but also of the writer; and by this I mean in 
particular the novelist or the dramatist. 


VII < 


‘Human Dignity 


f it is possible for me to take an over-all view of the spir- 
itual journey I have undertaken to describe in this book, 
I am tempted to think now that the year 1936 marked a deci- 
sive turn in my life. In May 1936, a new government was 
formed, known as the Popular Front. The failure of this coali- 
tion cannot be denied by anyone today. One sign of this fail- 
ure was the fact that Léon Blum and his associates not only 
were unable to avert the threat of war already existing at that 
time, but undoubtedly by their illusions and their weakness 
contributed to making the conflict inevitable. Besides, it should 
not be forgotten that Léon Blum declared in 1932 that Hitler 
would never be able to seize power. It can be asserted now that 
a clear-sighted statesman, aware of the danger presented by 
Hitlerism, could have held the Führer back and perhaps driven 
him to suicide. It is true that the Rhineland had been remili- 
tarized before Léon Blum came to power. But the same spirit 
of surrender was to be found in everyone, with the exception 
of a few Rightists whose influence was almost nil at that time; 
and that spirit of surrender was concealed only by an anti- 
Fascist rhetoric in which no clear intelligence could place any 
trust. 

This reference to the political events of that period may be 
surprising in the present context. Yet it seems indispensable. 

114 


Human Dignity 115 


For, thus confronted by historical circumstances which I think 
I am in a position to say I felt immediately as exceptionally 
grave, my prospective thought, as always on the dramatic and 
not specifically philosophic level, began to experience what 
it is no exaggeration to describe as a change of focus. By this 
I mean that the anthropological problem, considered of course 
in its ethical aspect, became for me at that time increasingly 
acute. 

It could not be said, however, that there was a complete 
break in my evolution. The dramas of ambiguity which I 
analyzed in the preceding chapter presuppose and at the same 
time give evidence of a complete reappraisal of the human 
being as such. It may even be said that if we compare Le 
Chemin de créte with Un Homme de Dieu, the evolution 
which I am trying to clarify here is already apparent. Un 
Homme de Dieu closed with a prayer, an anguished appeal to 
Him who alone knows me as I am: in other words, the 
theocentric reference remained explicit there. This is no longer 
the case in Le Chemin de créte. The heroine, having reached 
the stage of being absolutely in the dark about her own nature 
and her own worth, no doubt appeals to invisible powers to 
come to her assistance, but she has not even 2 name for them, 
and perhaps she no longer considers them distinct from the 
noblest parts of herself. The truth is that Ariane will never 
escape from the labyrinth. Liberation for her can be effected 
only through the medium of the written word, diary-writing, 
an extremely illusory liberation by which not even she herself 
can be deceived. 

In this play, one can already hear, though still rather faintly, 
disturbing echoes of the events of the outside world, and it 
is possible to imagine that the uneasiness felt by all the char- 
acters without exception, though in no way explained by the 
increasing confusion on the political scene, is, however, an 
expression of this confusion and, as it were, a microcosmic 
projection of it. 


116 Gabriel Marcel 


But Le Dard, written a few months later, during the first 
weeks of 1936, and therefore slightly before the events which 
I have just recalled, includes a specific reference both to the 
Hitler threat, which had been constantly growing in the three 
previous years, and to the evolution which was becoming more 
apparent among Leftist intellectuals, the very ones who were 
to champion the Popular Front. But need I say that this evolu- 
tion was not to stop after the terrible hiatus of the war and 
the Occupation? Le Dard develops the theme to which, fifteen 
years later, I was to give articulate expression on the phil- 
osophical level in the introduction to Les Hommes contre 
Phumain* entitled “L’Universel contre les masses.” I wish 
to point out here that my original intention was to give this 
title to the whole book. I yielded, however, to the wishes of 
my publisher, who, of course, thought it lacked commercial 
appeal. Today, however, I feel that the title under which the 
book appeared, Les Hommes contre Phumain, is much less 
faithful to my essential purpose. 

And so we come, at the end of the singularly tortuous path 
we have followed, to the central problems I had stated at the 
beginning of this book and which, under various forms, will, 
almost without interruption, be our primary consideration to 
the very end. It is actually on the essence of human dignity 
that the conflict in Le Dard is focused, and this conflict is 
between Professor Eustache Soreau and the German singer, 
Werner Schnee. 

As is almost always the case, I find it difficult to be very 
precise about the origin of this work. The few preparatory 
notes I was able to lay my hands on do not enable me to find 
out from where, as we say in French, “Vidée est sortie.” It 
should be pointed out that the word “sortir,” when applied 
to a thought, has always a somewhat vague meaning and cor- 
responds to a metaphor which cannot be made explicit: that 
of a light suddenly issuing from darkness. All I can say with 


*See Man against Humanity in Author’s Works Cited. 


Human Dignity 117 


certainty is that in a certain essayist of the Left, who came 
from a family of very modest means, I thought I had sensed 
or, at any rate, imagined, the bad conscience which is the 
distinctive characteristic of my hero. A book recently pub- 
lished by this writer makes me think that in reality he re- 
sembled my Eustache Soreau much less than I thought, for 
it reveals that, unlike the hero of my play, he had a Christian 
upbringing. 

It is of course necessary to keep in mind here my central 
observation: otherwise, the references to my dramatic works, 
as I have said repeatedly, lose all their significance. No more 
here than elsewhere did I start from abstract ideas to be 
dramatically illustrated afterwards. In other words, I did not 
have in mind two different or even opposite conceptions of 
man and of his essential dignity. On the contrary, this opposi- 
tion took shape in relation to the two central characters and 
to the concrete situation in which they are involved. It should 
be further understood that the spectator (or the reader) is 
urged to go beyond the particular case presented to him in 
order to find its essential significance. We may add that this 
significance is in the strongest sense of the word an historical 
one; that is to say, it cannot be fully perceived without refer- 
ence to the events which were to follow. Thus, the final 
scene of the play anticipates the great drama which was to 
take a more precise form after the end of the second World 
War, and whose denouement we today are still unable to 
foresee. I might note in passing that the play, performed for 
the first time in Paris in 1937, was presented by the students 
of the University of Brussels in 1949, as I recall, and it seemed 
so close to present-day issues that many were surprised to 
learn that it had been written before the war. 

Eustache Soreau, as I have said, belonged to a Parisian family 
of very modest means. An excellent and hard-working stu- 
dent, he has won scholarships, distinguished himself in exam- 
inations and concours, and is presently teaching in a Paris 


118 Gabriel Marcel 


lycée. He has been the tutor of a wealthy politician’s son and 
has married his pupil’s sister, Béatrice Durand Fresnel. His 
father-in-law, who congratulates himself on having given his 
daughter to an impecunious young man, has used his political 
influence to advance Soreau’s academic career. So Eustache 
has been lucky. He acknowledges the fact and even speaks 
of it repeatedly with a feeling of bitterness verging on exas- 
peration. An acquaintance of his, Gertrude Heuzard, a girl 
who was a militant worker with him in the ranks of the 
Socialist party and who lost her teaching position for having 
carried her revolutionary propaganda into the classroom, never 
stops showing Eustache, by insinuations and caustic allusions, 
that she looks upon him as a turncoat, hating him for allowing 
himself to become a bourgeois. By marrying into a rich family, 
he has betrayed the class to which he belonged—the working 
class. Eustache’s mother, on the other hand, a good but some- 
what vulgar woman, whose mental capacity is that of a con- 
cierge or a charwoman, treats her daughter-in-law with al- 
most servile respect, which makes Eustache angry. He is 
hypersensitive; his bad conscience gnaws at him, as evidenced 
by his violent outbursts whenever he expresses his anti-Fascist 
convictions. I was very much interested in showing that suc- 
cess—a certain kind of success—may become a source of 
resentment. Similarly, a friend of mine, recently returned 
from countries in Dark Africa formerly belonging to the 
French Union, told me that the natives there appeared to her 
deprived of a revolution, frustrated and bitter because they 
had received as a gift what apparently they would have pre- 
ferred to snatch, like spoils after a battle. 

Sometime before, while a lecturer at the University of 
Marburg, Eustache had known a young German, Werner 
Schnee, who had become his friend. The latter is a singer of 
lieder, an artist capable of interpreting with delicacy and 
depth the great German Romantic composers. But his accom- 
panist, Rudolf Schonthal, who is a Jew, has received shameful 


Human Dignity 119 


treatment at the hands of the Nazis and has been forced to 
leave Germany. In a gesture of solidarity, Werner also has 
left his native country, to the great displeasure of his wife 
Gisela, who claims she is not interested in politics any more 
than she is interested in “that ugly Jew with the protruding 
ears.” The Soreaus have opened their home to Werner and 
his wife. The young singer has just come back from Switzer- 
land where his friend Rudolf is dying, a victim of Nazi cruelty. 

But cohabitation will bring out into the open the latent 
hostility between Eustache and Werner. 

Every opinion and every judgment of Eustache Soreau is 
inspired by his desire to remain in line with a certain class 
ideology. And indeed his constant desire not to betray the 
social milieu of his birth may appear a noble thing in principle. 
But it will soon be discovered that this preoccupation is 
vitiated, as it were, by his bad conscience. Toward Béatrice 
whom he loves, however, and who has deep affection for 
him, his conduct is unjust and almost hateful; he blames her 
for supporting the cause of the privileged bourgeoisie which 
he despises. But, though probably not blind to her parents 
shortcomings, she has no desire to break her ties with them. 
Between her family and her husband she tries to be a steady- 
ing influence in a rapidly worsening situation. With a clear- 
sightedness not unmixed with deep compassion she follows 
the progress of the sort of moral disease from which Eustache 
is suffering: a guilty conscience. 

Werner Schnee, by leaving his homeland, has shown his 
horror of Hitlerism; yet for his part, he wishes to remain 
independent of all parties, whatever they may be. Eustache 
reproaches him for not associating with the other German 
political refugees, but it is because he does not wish to develop 
a refugee mentality, which would be distasteful to him as a 
kind of uniform like any other. Eustache accuses him of being 
an individualist. But this is only a label, and Werner dislikes 
all labels. Above all, he intends to remain a man—a word 


120 Gabriel Marcel 


which grates on Eustache’s nerves. We have here a funda- 
mental point. Werner despises what he calls ideology. He 
sees that if his friend likes Beethoven, it is because he ascribes 
to the German composer a democratic ideology very similar 
to his own. Now, whatever Beethoven’s political opinions may 
have been, they have nothing to do with his genius, which is 
all that matters. For his genius is an integral part of his hu- 
manity—that is to say, his way of touching the hearts of all 
men. It is in this respect that he is universal. In the eyes of 
Werner, however, the partisan spirit he finds in Eustache is 
exactly the opposite of this kind of universality. Werner ac- 
cuses him of judging others, not on their intrinsic qualities 
but according to the category into which they fall. Needless 
to say, Eustache reacts vigorously to the way in which Werner 
judges him, and hostility grows between the two men. What 
makes it worse is the fact that Eustache vaguely feels his 
wife’s sympathy for Werner and his jealousy is aroused. 
Finally Eustache commits a shameful act. Werner has told 
him in the strictest confidence that an emissary from the Hitler 
government has come to him with a proposal that he return 
to Germany where he would be offered an engagement in 
an opera house on condition that he give his allegiance to 
the political regime. He has refused, of course. He would 
have disgraced himself by accepting such an offer. Yet he 
has refrained from telling his wife Gisela about it; she would 
not have understood. Yielding to some shameful impulse, 
Eustache discloses to the young woman the secret entrusted 
to him by Werner. She flies into a rage when she learns that 
they could have returned to Germany. They separate, and 
the wife eventually joins a German baron who has been 
courting her for some time and with whom she will be able 
to return home without any difficulty. 

Thus Eustache, always obsessed by the idea of treason, 
treason to his class—that is, to an entity—betrays a real human 
being, one he used to call his friend. Werner is generous 


Human Dignity 121 


enough to give his wife the little money he has left; he will 
soon be reduced to poverty. From every side, to be sure, he 
receives invitations, because he has the gift of arousing sym- 
pathy. But he refuses to make use of this gift to derive material 
advantage from it. A scruple the nature of which he himself 
is unable to understand prevents him from drawing any profit 
from the ability he has of touching men’s hearts, as if he, too, 
had fallen a prey to a guilty conscience, to such an extent 
that he wonders if in a certain mysterious way he has not been 
tainted by Eustache. However, this guilty conscience prompts 
him to do something heroic, a thing that some will call the 
act of a madman. He, too, is going to return to Germany, but 
without the passport offered by Hitler’s henchmen. He knows 
from now on what his fate will be: he will be arrested, and 
this is what he wants because he suddenly realizes that this 
gift, this favor or grace, which has been granted to him, he 
may find useful in helping the unfortunate political prisoners 
with whom he will mingle. Here let us understand clearly 
that there can be no question for him of political affiliation 
since he will continue to the end to be a nonpolitical man. 
What counts for him is the fact that those political prisoners 
are unfortunate, innocent people who are being shamefully 
treated. He will bring to them at least the benefit of his pres- 
ence, of the music that lives in him and that can be bestowed 
as charity. There is also another reason for this decision: Wer- 
ner has come to realize that Eustache was right in suspecting 
him and that, in fact, he is in love with Béatrice. And as the 
latter in turn has serious grievances against Eustache, since 
out of spite he has finally become the lover of the bitter and 
resentful Gertrude, Werner feels that if he remained in France, 
neither she nor even he himself could resist temptation. By 
his decision to return to Germany under the conditions I 
mentioned, he sets up before her an insurmountable obstacle. 
And this is what he explains to Béatrice in the last scene of 
the play—to Béatrice, who finds it difficult to rise with him 


122 Gabriel Marcel 


to such heights. More than that, his leaving under such cir- 
cumstances appears to her as a kind of suicide. “Not in the 
least,” Werner objects, “suicide is a crime . . . I am simply 
putting myself at the disposal . . .” “Of what?” asks Béa- 
trice. “Of the cause? Of the revolution?” “I am not interested 
in the cause,” he says emphatically, “I am interested in men.” 
And as he senses that perhaps Béatrice is going to weaken 
and abandon to his fate the husband she despises, he appeals 
to her: “You cannot leave him. You must always remember 
that you are the wife of a pauper . . . Poverty is not lack of 
money or lack of success, Eustache has had money, he has had 
success. He has remained poor and grown poorer still. No 
doubt he will never be cured of his poverty. This is the greatest 
evil of our time; it spreads like a plague. No physician has 
yet been found to treat it. It cannot even be diagnosed. Per- 
haps the artist will be spared, even if he starves. And also 
the true believer who can pray . . . All other people are 
in danger.” 


Béatrice. You ask me to live with a leper. 

Werner. Leper colonies are going to multiply here on earth, I fear. 
To very few people will grace be granted to live there, knowing 
they are among lepers and yet not finding them repulsive. Much 
more than grace, they will need a viaticum to sustain them on their 
way. 

Béatrice. I am not brave enough, Werner, I assure you. 

Werner. You will think of me, as I think of Rudolf. Later on I shall 
be in you a living presence, as Rudolf still is in me. You will remem- 
ber then what I told you here a few weeks ago. If there were only 
the living, Béatrice . . ? 


The words he spoke were these: “If there were only the 
living, I think life on this earth would be quite impossible.” 

But all this calls for a commentary which penetrates to the 
core of what I wish to make clear in the course of this book: 
what is this poverty which is neither lack of money nor lack 


2 Le Dard, Act III, scene viii. 


Human Dignity 123 


of success and which, we are told, is going to spread like 
leprosy? It might be said, I think, that it is the spirit of ab- 
straction which finds in our own day—and we must not 
hesitate to say so—its most terrifying though not its only in- 
carnation in communism. But this spirit of abstraction cannot 
be separated from a certain lack of love, and by this I mean 
the inability to treat a human being as a human being, and 
for this human being the substituting of a certain idea, a 
certain abstract designation. The leper colonies which are 
going to multiply on earth (let me recall that this was written 
in 1936) are the popular democracies, to the extent that they 
are committed to the spirit of abstraction in its Marxist form. 
But we must hasten to add that any technocracy, even if it 
belongs to the capitalist system, can be guilty of the same 
fundamental error. When it goes so far as to consider the 
individual within the framework of society as a mere unit 
of production and to judge his worth only in terms of pro- 
ductivity, it also tends to create communities of lepers, how- 
ever attractive their outward aspect may be. When, for 
example, I see huge buildings being erected on the outskirts 
of Paris, impersonal, merciless structures, not for human beings 
to dwell in (for “to dwell” still has a human connotation) but 
to be “incorporated into,” I have the immediate and almost 
physical feeling of this universal threat which today weighs 
upon human beings, so that, after passing through these 
suburbs where everything changes before our eyes at such 
amazing speed, I have even gone so far as to say that it was 
already the setting up of a communist society. 


Here, the reader may very well raise an objection to the 
abrupt and arbitrary manner in which his attention has been 
diverted from the very particular cases which I have treated 
in my plays to a wholly general situation which refuses to 
be confined within the limits of such specific cases. He may 
well question, for example, what possible connection there is 


124 Gabriel Marcel 


between a guilty conscience and technocracy. Undoubtedly, 
this would appear to be a strong objection; but I shall say only 
that anyone who raises the objection places himself on a plane 
which is, as a matter of fact, altogether different from mine, 
not only with respect to my plays, but also with respect to the 
existential philosophy which I have tried to develop since I 
began my independent thinking. 

It is of course obvious that if one remains in the realm of 
notions, it is quite impossible to extract from an idea such as 
that of technocracy or, for that matter, of any social regime 
considered in terms of its distinctive characteristics, anything 
resembling what I have called a guilty conscience. But what 
matters to me is not technocracy taken in itself, since it is 
still, after all, an abstraction, but rather what it tends to do to 
the individuals who will have to live under it. Moreover—and 
this is of the utmost importance—the world we live in, which 
is also the world of my plays, is one in which technocracy does 
not reign supreme. Technocracy is felt as a distant threat, 
and at the same time as a spirit tending more and more to 
inform life. A character like Eustache cannot be separated 
from this context, namely, that of a changing society in which 
the class struggle as Marx had conceived of it, within the 
framework of a society moving towards industrialization 
(such as it appeared to that remarkable observer), the class 
struggle, let me repeat, tends to be replaced by very different 
relations, infinitely more subtle and less rigid springing from 
the fact that a certain section of the bourgeoisie joined the 
proletariat and that a very large portion of the proletariat 
formed a bourgeois class. Now if I were asked why I made 
Werner Schnee a singer—Werner, a man struggling for the 
universal against the masses—I would answer that my motives 
for that choice became apparent to me a posteriori, and always 
for the same reason, because I did not pass from the abstract 
idea to the concrete, but rather the reverse. A singer like 


Human Dignity 125 


Werner Schnee is, essentially, an unselfish, dedicated person, 
since the task to which he has devoted his life consists in 
making available to others the work of the great creative 
artists: Werner is a mediator, as any instrumentalist would 
be, but mediation here is more evident and vital than in any 
other case, because the voice is part of the human being, much 
more so than an instrument such as a violin or a piano. It 
could also be said that the spiritual climate of Werner is 
admiration. The question for him is to use this power within 
him to serve what he admires and, in effect, to make it ad- 
mirable to listeners—but, needless to say, not just amy listeners. 
In this domain there is no room for just anybody, since there 
are people to whom an art will always remain something 
alien—because of a disgrace whose nature and significance 
actually escape us. It is a fact that we simply have to accept. 
And the existence of these “outsiders,” or, more exactly, these 
Boeotians, does not detract from the universality of the mes- 
sage, for this universality, in terms of logic, must be conceived 
not in extension but only in comprehension. In an interpreter 
like Werner Schnee, the self, it would seem, tends to be ab- 
sorbed in the inspired act of serving the beautiful work of art, 
which does not mean, of course, that vanity can be excluded 
from it. Such is the nature of the human being that this vanity 
can force its way in anywhere, as a kind of corrosion. But 
we can safely say that the conditions leading to a perfect 
interpretation tend in some way to preclude this intervention. 
This is most certainly true in the case of Werner Schnee, 
and the sympathetic feeling he inspires in those around him 
can surely be ascribed to the fact that he exists as little as 
possible for himself. In that, by the way, he may be likened 
to the believer. We may recall Werner’s words to Béatrice 
quoted earlier: the artist will probably be safe from this 
disease of poverty as well as the true believer who can pray. 
In either case, salvation comes from transcendence, even if, 


126 Gabriel Marcel 


here and there, it takes on very different aspects; and this 
transcendency, as we shall see more and more clearly, is 
closely related to universality. 

It may be necessary here to return to what I meant by 
admiration. It is not enough to say that it has been of tre- 
mendous importance in my own life, and that, for me, the 
inability to admire is the supreme misfortune. I have always 
felt that admiration was of the same order as creation, that 
undoubtedly it was even a sort of merciful dispensation by 
which those who have been denied the gift of creating visible 
things can nevertheless reach the level on which the creative 
spirit reveals itself. The idea of a relationship between ad- 
miration and creation may be surprising at first, because it 
would seem that people tend to confuse creation and produc- 
tion. Yet it could be said, generally speaking, that any produc- 
tion depends on a technique and that creation, on the contrary, 
is of a meta-technical order. This may seem at first a purely 
verbal distinction. But what I have tried to show is that in 
reality any creation is a response to a call received, and it 
is receptivity that we should stress here while pointing out 
that a serious error is made whenever receptivity and passivity 
are confused, as it seems to me they are in Kant, for example. 
This idea, which I discussed for the first time in a study in- 
cluded later in the volume entitled Du refus a Pinvocation, 
belongs therefore to approximately the same period as Le 
Dard, and the relationship is as clear as can be between Le 
Monde cassé and Position et approches concrètes. I shall 
quote a passage from this essay which is directly related to 
the idea of active or creative receptivity: 


We already find in the process of acquiring knowledge the para- 
dox which is at the heart of creation proper, but this paradox may 
perhaps be more easily detected in the artist than in the areas where 
knowledge is elaborated and where the pragmatic in all its forms 
comes to cover up the initial mystery of the naissance-au-réel (becom- 


Human Dignity 127 


ing aware of the real) whose depth is essentially unfathomable. The 
artist appears to himself as sustained by the very thing he tries to in- 
carnate. Thus in him the identification of receiving and giving is 
finally effected. But this can be achieved only in his own particular 
sphere corresponding in this register to the area such as I described 
it when I analyzed the chez soi. There is every reason to believe that 
there is no difference of nature but merely a difference of power 
between the ability to feel and the ability to create; both presuppose 
not only the existence of a soi, but of a world in which the soi recog- 
nizes itself, exercises and spreads itself; a world in between the closed 
and the open, between having and being, and of which my body ap- 
pears necessarily the symbol or the materialized nucleus. But we are 
entitled to suppose that we are grossly deceived by appearances in 
our hypostasis when we treat as independent, circumscribed reality 
what may be only the emergence of some measureless kingdom whose 
submerged regions and underwater ramifications can be sighted only 
accidentally and by sudden illuminations. Might not the very fact of 
living, in the full sense we give the word when we speak of our own 
life, of human life, imply for one who would go to the heart of the 
matter, the existence of a metaphysical Atlantis, unexplorable by 
definition, but whose presence actually gives our own experience its 
dimension, its value, and its mysterious quality? 3 


It would be appropriate, of course, in the perspective we 
have adopted here, to state more explicitly what was treated 
in this passage in allusive and metaphorical terms. The diffi- 
culty is, however, that what we are considering could not in 
all likelihood be conceptualized without contradiction. For the 
concepts can be formed only from the sphere which lies, as 
I have said, between having and being. And it could be said 
that thought, when it comes to these obscure shores, uses a 
method of approach entirely different from the one it uses 
when it applies itself to knowing or even to understanding 
something. I need hardly say that here we find again, though 
at a deeper level of experience, what has been said earlier 
about participation. But what I wish to emphasize is that a 
careful examination of active receptivity can help us formu- 


* Du refus à Pinvocation, pp. 123-124. 


128 Gabriel Marcel 


late our conception of man and of what we have called human 
dignity. Indeed, the time has come to deal squarely with this 
notion of dignity. 

We must admit that in current phraseology what is called 
the dignity of the human being is described in terms of Kant- 
ism (here, by the way, reduced to its simplest expression). I 
refer to the idea according to which the inalienable value of 
man lies in the fact that he is a rational being, that stress is 
placed on his faculty of understanding and comprehending 
the intelligible order of the world, or rather on his faculty of 
conforming to certain maxims considered as universally valid. 
To my mind, there can be no question of challenging the legit- 
imate value of such an interpretation. Yet, at the same time, 
it seems to me difficult to deny that during the last hundred 
years or so this rationalism, respectable as it may be, has lost 
much of what can be termed its vitality, as if it had gradually 
loosened its hold on men’s minds. And the development of 
the philosophy of existence in its various aspects, and also, 
we might add, of the philosophy of life espoused by Bergson 
and his followers, could not be understood without this in- 
creasing lack of interest in a form of thought threatened by 
the dangers of formalism. 

It is my own profound belief that we cannot succeed in 
preserving the mysterious principle at the heart of human 
dignity unless we succeed in making explicit the properly 
sacral quality peculiar to it, a quality which will appear all 
the more clearly when we consider the human being in his 
nudity and weakness—the human being as helpless as the child, 
the old man, or the pauper. Here we should consider a para- 
dox which appears at first glance to be extremely embarrassing. 

Do we not run the risk, as a rule, of letting ourselves be 
deceived by what I would like to call a decorative conception 
of dignity—and the word “dignity” here is significant—which 
we more or less confuse with the display of pomp that usually 
accompanies power? It is considered advisable, for example, 


Human Dignity 129 


to surround the judicial power with appearances and condi- 
tions likely to command respect, or, if one prefers, to put a 
certain distance between men entrusted with high duties and 
ordinary people. It would be an error, certainly—perhaps 
even an aberration—to deny the necessity of enhancing, even 
by artificial means, the value of certain institutions when these 
assume, in any degree whatever, the character of a sacerdotal 
function. But at the same time there is always the fear that, 
humanly speaking, this pomp may conceal only emptiness and 
deceit—and if so, it can be truthfully said it turns against 
itself, as it were, and finally in the eyes of the critical observer 
deals a crushing blow to its own authority. This remains true 
even if we leave aside such things as uniforms or pompous 
display to consider only the attitudes, the solemn tone of voice, 
the gestures: these, as often as not, may arouse in the one 
who remains “outside” a questioning attitude which can easily 
turn into challenge and revolt. 

It is in this line of existential thought that rationalism, it 
seems to me, shows its weakness, a weakness that the men of 
the present day can hardly fail to notice. It is as if we had 
become more and more aware of the fact that reason may 
become sham and parody. But considerations of another kind 
point in the same direction: it can be said that our times will 
have witnessed what I might readily term a gradual seculariza- 
tion of reason, a functional treatment tending more and more 
to reduce reason to a series of technical operations depending 
on a descriptive science. Around it there is hardly anything 
left of the aura which still accompanied the word Vernunft, 
for example, for Kant and his followers. I do not claim, how- 
ever, that this process of reduction can ever become exhaustive 
enough to leave nothing deserving attention or even respect; 
I am in my own mind deeply convinced of the contrary. 
But I doubt that the language of the traditional rationalist 
philosophy, as it was in the past, is capable of conveying to 
the mind of modern man this reality which one might be 


130 Gabriel Marcel 


tempted to call residual, and which undoubtedly must be 
described as both immediate and secret. These two words 
seem to contradict each other, but the contradiction, if we 
pause to reflect, appears inherent in what we call the sacred. 

The phenomenologist, Emmanuel Lévinas, in a recent trea- 
tise entitled Totalité et infini, showed, I think, great insight 
in this, by stressing the irreducible originality of what he calls 
the “face to face,” that is to say, how the other person’s face 
appears to me. He thinks—and I am strongly tempted to go 
along with him in this—that the otherness we speak of here 
can in no way be reduced to the one which a dialectic of the 
Hegelian type can, through conflict, finally reduce to identity. 
Here, otherness presents a consistency which is wholly lacking 
in the world of objects or objectifiable data. I shall not exam- 
ine here the way in which Emmanuel Lévinas tries to avoid 
the pluralism such a position may seem to imply. It is rather 
surprising that in designating a person who is “other” but 
who, at the same time, presents himself to me to be not only 
confronted but greeted, he does not use the term which seems 
to me the only adequate one—“neighbor.” We should note 
that this word takes its full meaning only when preceded by 
the possessive adjective, the possessive in this case no longer 
being used to claim ownership. 

It goes without saying that here again we find—doubtless 
at a deeper level of experience—what has been said earlier of 
the vocative “thou.” It is in a philosophy centered on the 
second person that the words “my neighbor” come to have 
meaning. 

It is apparent, on the other hand, that from the experience 
implicit in the words “my neighbor” we are drawn almost 
imperceptibly to the affirmation of a fraternity. But here we 
come to an important point which we have no right to over- 
look. In principle I can call “my brothers” only those born 
of the same father as I. Brotherhood, or fraternity, implies a 


*The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1961. 


Human Dignity 131 
common sonship. And everything leads one to think that the 
first French revolutionists, when they laid at the very founda- 
tion of the Declaration of the Rights of Man, liberty, equality 
and fraternity—in their eyes an indivisible unit—were ac- 
tuated by an underlying deism which was later to be ques- 
tioned. It may seem paradoxical that the inscription “Liberty, 
Equality, Fraternity” appears on all public buildings in an 
officially “laique” country where, for a long time, the belief 
in a God who is Father of all men has been purely a matter 
of choice. Under these conditions, fraternity has become 
nothing more than an “as if”: men must behave toward one 
another as if they were brothers. What we see here is only a 
vague aspiration or perhaps a dim nostalgic feeling for a past 
era when fraternity was an article of faith. The situation re- 
specting equality is quite different, since this word expresses 
an exigency which tends to be more and more institutional- 
ized, considerably more attention being given, incidentally, to 
rights than to duties and obligations. But a very important 
question can be raised here, one which has been in my mind 
since the end of the second World War and which has also 
been approached, though in an indirect manner, by an Aus- 
trian who has been residing in the United States since the last 
war and has taught in American universities. I refer to Count 
Kihnelt-Leddihn and to his book, Liberty or Equality.” It is, 
of course, on the conjunction or that the stress is placed. As 
for me, without knowing anything at that time of the writings 
of Count Kiihnelt-Leddihn, I had, for the first time in Lisbon 
in 1949, attempted to show that, contrary to the belief of the 
men of 1789 and their innumerable followers, there would 
appear to exist between equality and fraternity a secret oppo- 
sition connected with the fact that these two exigencies stem 
from two different sources. As I have already noted, equality is 
essentially the claiming of something; it is, in the fullest sense of 


ë Erik Maria von Kihnelt-Leddihn, Liberty or Equality: The Challenge 
of Our Time, ed. John P. Hughes (London: Hollis & Carter, 1952). 


132 Gabriel Marcel 


the word, ego-centric. I am your equal, his equal, or their equal. 
Probing further, we would not have any difficulty in finding, 
after Nietzsche and Scheler, the presence of resentment at 
the heart of equality. It must, of course, be added that this 
presence, which is not, and in a sense cannot, be ascertained, 
remains hidden under a rational or pseudo-rational camou- 
flage. There is no reason why I should not be your equal, 
it would be even irrational to admit that I am not. 

One would have to show further by what processes one 
passes from evident equality in certain rights to equality that 
is much less evident in all rights, to the supposed equality of 
the subjects themselves, this equality of all men—supposing 
the word has a meaning, which is exceedingly doubtful— 
justifying the equality of rights. 

But with fraternity, it seems to me, the case is very different. 
Unlike equality, fraternity is essentially hetero-centric: you 
are my brother, I recognize you as such, I greet you as my 
brother. It is certainly evident that the reverse is possible 
here. It may happen, if I am wronged by you, that I have 
to remind you reproachfully that, after all, I am your brother. 
But this is only a derived case. And, further, it is very likely 
that in such an event I would address these words of blame 
to you in the name of my rights trampled upon by you—that 
is, in the name of equality much more than of fraternity. But 
if we focus our attention on the act of expansive recognition 
forming the basis of fraternity, it will be seen as a spontaneous 
movement exactly the reverse of the claim implied in equality: 
you are my brother and, because you are my brother, I re- 
joice not only in anything good which may happen to you but 
also in acknowledging the ways in which you are superior 
to me. Why should I feel the need of being your equal? We 
are brothers through all our dissimilarities, and why should 
these dissimilarities not imply inequalities in your favor— 
surely I shall not say to my detriment—for, since we are 
brothers, it is exactly as if the radiance emanating from your 


Human Dignity 133 


gifts, acts, and works were reflected on me. This I shall ex- 
press perhaps if I say very simply: “I am proud of you,” which 
indeed would be meaningless, even impossible, if I were intent 
on being or on showing myself your equal. 

But here I should close what may well be regarded as a 
long parenthesis: everything we have said leads us to think 
that if human dignity can today be fully recognized without 
our necessarily falling into the old groove of abstract rational- 
ism, it is on condition that we place ourselves in the perspec- 
tive of fraternity and not of equalitarianism. Here I must 
return to a thought I may have conveyed earlier in this dis- 
cussion. I think it would be wrong, or at any rate unwise, to 
claim that human dignity is the concern only of those, what- 
ever their form of worship may be, who explicitly recognize 
God as Father of all men, this dignity appearing as the very 
mark of the imago dei. Or, more exactly, I feel that such a 
position could not be accepted purely and simply, although 
there cannot be any question of explicitly rejecting it. To 
accept it would be to make light of the fact that an unbeliever 
—I do not say an atheist, since the term does not fit in this 
context—may, in fact, have a keen and exacting sense of 
human dignity and give in his actions the most irrefutable 
proof of it. I do not have in mind particularly those who are 
against injustice and oppression in speech only, for such a 
verbal protest is of doubtful value, except when it involves 
risks for the one who formulates it. What I am thinking of, 
rather, is an active interest in the oppressed, whoever they 
may be. And in practice this interest does imply the conscious- 
ness of a fraternal relationship with those very people who 
are to be defended. Shall we say that those unbelievers enter- 
tain, in spite of everything, a belief in God as a father, a belief 
which remains concealed under their opinions as free-thinkers? 
In this connection, I myself have dwelt on the important fact 
that each of us can be mistaken about what he thinks he be- 
lieves and what he actually believes. And, if this is so, then 


134 Gabriel Marcel 


belief is really a mode of being and can by no means be likened 
to an opinion, that is, to something one possesses. 

I feel, however, that one should not go so far as to interpret 
this in an apologetic sense. As for the unbeliever, I should 
prefer to say this: insofar as he truly possesses the militant 
character I have just described, he has an active and even 
poignant experience of the mystery inherent in the human 
condition and in everything in it which is hazardous, precari- 
ous, and, at the same time, tragic. And what we discover in 
this line of thought is compassion, in the strongest sense of 
the word, and consequently to the degree that it implies in 
the person who feels it nothing at all resembling a feeling 
of superiority. This would amount to saying, then, that dig- 
nity must be sought at the antipodes of pretension and rather 
on the side of weakness. Here again, as I have done so often, 
I shall quote the words of one of my characters, Arnaud, at 
the end of Les Cœurs avides. His father is a man who seems 
to be always speaking “to the gallery,” in a dogmatic and 
somewhat solemn manner and, as a result, he himself is the 
only one deceived by this verbal pomposity intended to im- 
press his audience. In this final scene, he yields to weariness 
and dozes off. His son, Arnaud, a devout Christian, in whom 
the spirit of a child still lives, meditates before the sleeping 
old man: “It won’t be long now,” he says to himself, “before 
all these sentences he has been delighting in will be lost in 
silence. This affectation he takes so seriously will fall from 
him. He will remain here alone, weak and defenseless, like 
a child overcome by sleep and still clasping his toy to his 
breast. When in the presence of the living man who rants 
and raves, if only we could imagine him lying cold in death 
tomorrow.” 

Here we have a contrast which I find especially illuminating 
for the thought I have tried to bring out in this chapter—the 
contrast between an affected dignity which, because of its 
affectation, becomes the very antithesis of dignity, and the 


Human Dignity 135 


inalienable dignity inherent in the condemnation which is 
the fate of every man from the very fact of his birth. And 
here lies a paradox whose meaning deserves to be clarified. 

At first sight, one might be tempted to say that the fact 
of man’s mortality makes not only his acts but also his being 
appear ridiculously insignificant. And we must admit that 
contemporary man is only too prone to follow this line of 
thought. Now the moment the insignificance of the individual 
is declared, the way is paved for all forms of tyranny and 
especially for those which operate today behind a screen of 
democratic phraseology. But the remarkable thing is that this 
way is not the only one, and even more remarkable is the fact 
that within us something builds up to resist this disintegration 
and downward course. We shall have to determine more 
clearly and precisely the significance and nature of this re- 
sistance, but even now it should be sufficiently clear that this 
resistance is founded, not on the affirmation of the self and 
the pretensions it exudes, but on a stronger consciousness of 
the living tie which unites all men. 


VIII < 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 


T= preceding chapter closed with the evocation of a 
choice and the enunciation of a paradox. There is a 
temptation which seems for many men of our time to be 
almost irresistible to argue from the fact of man’s mortality 
that he is negligible as an individual, and to transfer to the 
collective and to society that regard of which he has been 
judged positively unworthy. But to reason in this way is to 
follow a road which leads to tyranny and to servitude. Now 
the paradox which we considered briefly in the preceding 
chapter is that we can, on the contrary, find in man’s finitude 
itself the principle of his essential dignity. How is this pos- 
sible? We have to take as a point of departure the fact that 
man is the only being known to us who knows himself to 
be mortal. Moreover, in the perspective we have adopted this 
fact reveals that man transcends the society to which a certain 
type of “reason” pretends to sacrifice him: for this very 
society, if it has a destiny, is not conscious of it, is incapable 
of having a conception of it, and a fortiori of mastering it. In 
the final reckoning, then, the priority rests with the individual. 

In any case, we must not fail to note that the fact of this 
knowledge of one’s own mortality involves the same in- 
determinateness with regard to value that I drew attention 
to earlier: from this ambiguous situation we can emerge only 

136 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 137 


on condition that we pass beyond the limits of the ego. In 
the text of Les Cæurs avides which I have cited, Arnaud was 
meditating not on his own mortality, but on that of his father. 
And this meditation was suffused with a compassion which 
was also a form of piety. It is precisely the nature of this piety 
which is to be accounted for, without, however, assuming that 
it can be reduced to something simpler and “self-evident” in 
the Cartesian sense. 

I believe that our first obligation is resolutely to avoid the 
reductionist interpretation which would see in this piety a 
weakened and faded survival of superstitious fears. Of course, 
such attempts at derivation will always be possible, but they 
would all be open to the central objection that almost in- 
evitably applies to any claim that “such and such is nothing 
but this or that” in other words, to the denial of the distinctive 
quality of a given experience in the name of genetic considera- 
tions. The truth would seem to be rather that piety toward 
the dead, or toward those whose death we anticipate, fulfills 
a demand for compensation, which pertains perhaps to a 
secret modality of justice. Everything happens as if the pious 
man—and I take this adjective in the most nonconfessional 
sense—felt called upon to oppose to this process of deteriora- 
tion, operating on the level of corruptible flesh, an inverse 
movement directed upward, or one might say towards exal- 
tation, had that word not lost its noble and etymological 
connotation. But here we must probe still deeper. What takes 
place—and that usually beyond the reach of explicit formula- 
tion—is the confidence that in death one’s being will raise 
itself to an integrity which life lived would perhaps not have 
allowed it, because of life’s perpetually dispersed, tortured, 
and torn character. The famous line of Mallarmé, “Tel qu’en 
lui-même enfin l’éternité le change,” * happily renders this 
accession to eternity. 

It is true that what is sometimes disclosed at the end of a 


*“As eternity at last gives him back to himself.” (Tr.) 


138 Gabriel Marcel 


life is its fundamental nullity, its inanity, or, what is even 
worse than nothingness, a perverted will embodied in a chain 
of actions, a will to destroy everything of man’s which makes 
for communication and peace. But it seems to me that it would 
always be difficult to hold to such a judgment; inevitably, 
something comes to attenuate its force and to refocus it into 
a question. For this same being who seemed to have willed 
evil was either deprived of love, in which case it is as if at the 
close of his existence he himself became accuser, or else he 
was loved, and this love to which he could not respond can- 
not help but take on the character of an intercession. But it 
is true that this word “intercession” can have meaning only 
if it is unspoken, and if the intersubjective consciousness re- 
fuses to admit or, a fortiori, to proclaim the finality of death. 
This is not the place to enter directly into the complex and 
involved argument which I have elsewhere devoted to the 
problem of survival, and which I have already touched upon 
in connection with L’Iconoclaste. Here I would draw atten- 
tion to just one or two points: 

To begin with, it seems to me that whatever our religious 
or agnostic position we have to reject any negativist dogma- 
tism, which is usually founded on a superannuated scientism. 
Furthermore, we must acknowledge that, contrary to the 
claim of societies under the domination of an official atheism, 
which allow themselves to be ruled by the logic of that same 
atheism, the exclusion of human life from any extension into 
the realm of the invisible is by no means reflected in a greater 
respect for human life or a more solicitous treatment of it; 
nor has it benefited from the fact that theoretically it is re- 
garded as a good whose loss is irretrievable. I am rather in- 
clined to think that in the societies in question a devaluation 
of life has come about in the sense that one might speak of a 
currency devaluation. Wars and revolutions with their fearful 
consumption of human lives have had such an effect. I recall 
the comment of a well-known general, made in the presence 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 139 


of a relative of mine who was a General Staff Officer, on the 
day after a bloody offensive action during the first World 
War: “Men are replaceable.” Scandalous, and even sacrile- 
gious words, for in fact a human individual is precisely that 
which is not replaceable. But it must be emphasized that our 
time, more than any other, has succeeded in introducing a 
merchandising distinction between “wholesale” and “retail” 
into a domain from which it should have been forever excluded. 
But that is one consequence among many others of a material- 
ism that in our time pervades not only our opinions but our 
way of life, and which, with an inconsistency that does no 
honor to human nature, is even coexistent in some people— 
I would not say with authentic religious beliefs, but with the 
ghosts of such beliefs. 

In the third place—but this is an observation of a different 
order from the foregoing—I think we must be on guard 
against a religious predisposition which, in the name of more 
or less correctly interpreted revealed texts, rejects a priori a 
metaphysical conception which has to do with the beyond. 
The Protestant theologian Jean Hering has justly observed 
that on the one hand it is not the function of the theologian 
to take sides for or against reincarnation, which depends on a 
mode of knowledge that is wholly foreign to theology, but 
that on the other, a fundamental dogma like that of the resur- 
rection of the body belongs to a quite special domain, to 
which the non-theologian has no access.? For my own part, 
I have always thought that the doctrine of reincarnation de- 
served much more attentive study than it has generally received 
from philosophers, and that it was possible for empirical facts 
to be uncovered which would make it appear to be a quite 
plausible hypothesis.’ 

If I feel obliged to introduce these few remarks here, it 


*Jean Hering, Revue d'histoire et de philosophie religieuses (University 
of Strasbourg, 1960), pp. 338-348. 

* See the two articles by Ian Stevenson, M. D., in Journal of the American 
Society for Psychical Research (April 1960). 


140 Gabriel Marcel 


is because it seems to me necessary to appraise the thickness 
of the concrete wall within which man today tends increas- 
ingly to enclose himself—a wall which is more and more 
impenetrable to all the premonitions and intimations of a 
spiritual counterpoise to that Luciferian solitude to which 
man seems self-condemned. 

The objection will doubtless be raised that theosophical and 
spiritualist societies can be found in plenty whose professed 
aims are to maintain or re-establish such communication be- 
tween man and the next world. I am mindful of it, and am 
indeed in regular contact with American and English societies 
for parapsychological research, where serious and valuable 
work is unquestionably being done. But we must remember 
that in this sphere critical research encounters especially diffi- 
cult conditions, for it operates in a realm where truth and 
error are inextricably intertwined. We should note especially 
that this research has a marginal character with respect to 
the development of science proper. Among French scientists, 
and among the philosophers as well, there is an extraordinary 
aversion to acknowledging such solidly established phenomena 
as telepathy and mind reading, solely because these phenomena 
run counter to certain unexamined postulates. Thus, a ration- 
alist like Alain, in an article published some thirty years ago, 
made what seemed to me the scandalous observation that even 
if parapsychological phenomena were taking place somewhere, 
he would take good care not to be present. What was being 
upheld here was a notion of intelligence as a sort of customs 
inspector, for it was in fact a species of contraband that was 
being excluded. I have always opposed such an attitude of 
mind, and it is perhaps at this point that we might enlist that 
adventurous disposition I evoked in my first chapter. 

I must beg the reader’s indulgence for the digressive and 
perhaps random character of these comments, touching upon 
the connection—which in my view is a valid one, though 
difficult to specify—between parapsychological research and 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 141 


the refusal to dogmatize about the nature of death, even if 
that refusal cannot take the form of a positive and unqualified 
affirmation of survival. 

But, generally speaking, philosophers, up to the present 
time, have paid almost no attention to certain structural char- 
acteristics of the human being which allow for the insertion 
of freedom into the fabric of our existence. Once more, un- 
less one is the champion of a scientific materialism which 
seems to be plainly dated, I do not see how it can be seriously 
maintained that survival after death is purely and simply un- 
thinkable. A margin of incertitude remains, and it is open to 
reflection as an aspect of the mystery involved in our destiny. 
And surely it would be equally wrong to regard this margin 
as fixed and constant, and therefore independent of the ways 
in which we tend to orient our existence in this world. It is 
plain that the more each one of us takes himself for a center, 
considering others only in relation to himself, the more the 
idea of the beyond will be emptied of all meaning, for this 
world beyond will then appear as a senseless prolongation. 
That is its character in a perspective like Sartre’s where “the 
other” is thought of primarily as a threat to my integrity, or, 
in other words, my self-sufficiency. On the contrary, the 
more the other, or others, will have become an integral part 
of my experience, the more I will be led to recognize their 
irreducible value as well as the difficulty for us of achieving 
a lasting harmony here below; and the more necessary it will 
be to conceive a mode of existence which is different from 
the one we have known, and which will lead us toward the 
real and pleromatic unity where we will be all in all. 

I am by no means underestimating the force of the objec- 
tion which is unfailingly provoked by such an assertion. It 
will be ascribed to the kind of wishful thinking which rigorous 
reflection is obliged to reject. 

But it is at this juncture that the reflections on hope which 
I was led to develop in the midst of the second World War 


142 Gabriel Marcel 


become relevant. I took as my point of departure the idea 
that desire and hope must be carefully distinguished, and that 
Spinoza in particular erred in identifying them. I had already 
observed in Positions et approches concrètes that the opposition 
is not, as Spinoza said, between fear and hope, but rather be- 
tween fear and desire, and I added that the negative correla- 
tive of hope is to adopt the perspective of the worst, as the 
defeatist does, for example. But ten years after this book was 
written I tried in a more searching way to cast light on some 
of the fundamental characteristics of hope, basing my reflec- 
tion on the situation which was ours as Frenchmen, namely, 
defeat and oppression by the enemy, or, more plainly still, the 
situation of prisoners awaiting liberation. What was revealed 
to me then, in a syneidesis like those to which I referred earlier, 
is that hope is always tied to an experience of captivity: “But 
I appear to myself as captive if I am conscious not only of 
being thrown into a situation, but engaged by it—under ex- 
ternal constraint—in a mode of existence which carries with 
it restrictions of all kinds on my own action ... Such a 
situation makes it impossible for me to rise to an experienced 
plenitude either of feeling or of thought.” But what I realize 
correlatively is that the subject of “I hope” is not reducible 
to the ego which is the subject of desire, or, in other words, 
that the subject of “I hope” excludes all claims. Such claims 
are in a certain way present in optimism, as found in someone 
who, confronted with a tragic situation, declares in the name 
of a wisdom to which he apparently lays claim, “I tell you 
that things will work out”—while his defeatist interlocutor 
will say with the same assurance, “Well, I say that nothing 
will work out and the worst will happen.” It is as if hope were 
situated in another dimension of which it could be said that 
it is that of humility and patience, a patience which is perhaps 
a profound and secret characteristic of life. If then we say, 
as we must, that hope is the act by which the temptation to 
despair is actively overcome, we must add that this victory 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 143 


is not necessarily accompanied by a feeling of effort; it is 
even linked to relaxation rather than to tension. But it should 
be stressed that this relaxation is not, and must not be, a 
slackening. This is one of the points on which I have been 
most insistent, especially with respect to the conception that 
we should have of the will. A type of stoicism, which has 
perhaps been essentially distorted by the expression given it 
in poets such as Lucanus and Corneille, seems to me to have 
contributed most unfortunately to the distortion of the reality 
here in question. I mentioned patience above, but it is obvious 
that this is the very opposite of passivity. We must in fact 
beware of falling prey to the same confusion to which I 
have drawn attention in connection with receptivity. As re- 
gards hope, nothing could be more mistaken than to see it as 
a kind of inactive hovering over an event which is expected 
to come to pass all by itself. It is indeed true that hope or 
patience can sink to the level where a sense of ease becomes 
mere slackening. I might quote here a few lines from “Phénom- 
énologie de l’espérance,” in Homo Viator.* I was answering 
the objection that might be made to the assertion that patience 
is generally operative in a person—a child, or someone who 
is sick, for example—while hope operates with respect to a 
situation which does not seem capable of being personalized: 


On reflection, the gap nonetheless tends to narrow, possibly because 
I have or have not hope in the being for whom I bear responsibility, 
and one may justifiably ask oneself whether “I have hope in thee” is 
not really the most authentic form of the verb “I hope.” But this does 
not exhaust the matter; the nature of the test is revealed in its effect 
on me, in the way it impinges on my being, insofar as it leaves me 
open to a permanent alteration. So it is that illness, for example, may 
make me into that deformed being typified as the professional sick 
person, who thinks of himself as such and contracts into the habitus 
of a sick person—the same processes holding true in the case of cap- 
tivity or exile. Insofar as I hope, I release myself from an inner deter- 
minism comparable to a cramp, by which I risk—in a testing experi- 


* Pages 29-67. 


144 Gabriel Marcel 


ence—settling into one of those degraded, fragmented, and finally 
somnambulistic expressions of the human person, which engenders 
despair above all because it involves fascination.” 


This last remark seems to me of the greatest importance, be- 
cause it underscores the obsessional character of despair. 

At this point we may return to the idea that I expressed 
earlier when I pointed out the structural characteristics of 
the human being and of the human condition which allow 
for the insertion of freedom. As I said in some remarks I ad- 
dressed, in 1937, to the International Congress of Philosophy, 
then convened in Paris: The fact that every one of us knows 
himself destined to die may expose us to the temptation to 
be hypnotized by this ineluctable deadline, and this thought 
of inevitable death which can overtake us at any moment can 
well degenerate into an obsession. But, more than that, if this 
obsession takes hold of us, if it possesses us in the strongest 
sense, it can make everything else seem devoid of meaning 
and colorless. When, some years ago, before the members 
of the Oxford Philosophic Society, I attempted to show that 
a sinister possibility is in a way implied by the fact that we 
are perishable beings, my listeners seemed scandalized, and I 
was told that such an attitude was morally reprehensible. But 
my Critics were reasoning as moralists in a case where medical 
or clinical reflection would have been much more in order. 
If we find ourselves confronted by someone in the grip of 
this obsessive fear of death, can we for a moment suppose 
that there would be any sense in offering him moral remon- 
strances, or in telling him that his behavior is antisocial? It is 
only through love, of which one could offer him a living 
witness, that one would perhaps be able to free him from this 
obsession, or to give breath once again to this soul in the grip 
of spiritual asphyxia. 

But on the philosophic level it is the business of reflection, 
as I attempted to show in 1937, to leave open the illusion 


5 Homo Viator, trans. E. Craufurd (London: Gollancz, 1951), p. 41. 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 145 


embodied in the belief that the fact of our being destined for 
death implies for us an inner fatalism, when actually, if that 
obsession takes hold of us, it is with the complicity of our 
freedom—a freedom which abdicates before the ineluctable. 

This is the moment for a study—never more necessary than 
in our own time—bearing upon the “essence of human free- 
dom,” to make use of a phrase employed by Schelling in his 
1809 treatise, which is perhaps his masterpiece and to which 
Heidegger freely refers today. 

The philosophic context into which the reflection on free- 
dom is brought into this chapter is likely to surprise the reader. 
He will ask why we need stress a connection between freedom 
and hope which does not seem apparent. Here, the controlling 
fact for me was that, as we have seen—particularly in a certain 
existential line of thought—an absolutely opposite relation was 
being articulated. When a philosopher like Sartre dares to 
write that man is condemned to be free, so that freedom is 
no longer treated as an achievement but rather as a radical 
deficiency, there is a great temptation to place freedom at 
the heart of despair, having only to invent some Marxist device 
in order to escape the dilemma thereby created. In an ex- 
istential perspective of that kind one would be disposed to 
define the free man as the rootless man, knowing and wanting 
himself as such. ‘This becomes apparent in the literature which 
we see around us by a peculiar sort of fraternization between 
the intellectual and the “beatnik,” and it is only by exhaustive 
—though by no means deceptive—dialectical acrobatics that 
the anarchism so defined by this fraternity can be transmuted 
into a Marxism which, while certainly heterodox, will try in 
spite of everything to be accepted or tolerated by the orthodox 
Marxists. 

It is not my intention to undertake a critique of this extrava- 
gant enterprise. I will merely observe that while a rigorous 


° Philosophische Untersuchungen über das Wesen der menschlichen Frei- 
heit,” in Philosophische Shriften, vol. I (1809). 


146 Gabriel Marcel 


philosophic thought must find it intrinsically negligible, it is 
nevertheless of considerable interest from a psychosociological 
viewpoint, or, if you wish, for that existential psychoanalysis 
whose value Sartre, in Being and Nothingness, should be 
credited with bringing to light, without perhaps suspecting 
that it might be turned against the dogmatism to which he 
would subsequently, and surprisingly, subscribe. 

Deliberately bracketing the enterprise in question, I would 
like to make explicit the nature of the relation which seems 
to me to exist between freedom and hope. This is all the more 
necessary since a very serious error can be made here, if, in 
mistaking the real characteristics of hope, we risk confusing 
with it the kind of vague and bewildered expectation that 
Gide, for example, celebrated in the Nourritures terrestres. 
In this perspective, freedom would be confused with the sug- 
gestibility of the dilettante who is in a certain way curious 
about everything, but without ever being ready to give him- 
self, to devote himself, to anything. There is, to my mind, no 
more absurd caricature of what a free man is and must be. 

To begin with, we must take note of the significant fact 
that not one of us can really say, “I am free.” There is no 
meaning in the statement that man is free, and there is of course 
still less in claiming, with Rousseau, that he is born free; there 
is no more fatal error than that which consists in regarding 
freedom as an attribute. I am tempted to say that it is exactly 
the opposite. It is far more appropriate to say that every one 
of us has to make himself into a free man; that within the 
bounds of the possible he has to take advantage of the struc- 
tural conditions of which I have spoken, which make freedom 
possible. In other words, freedom is a conquest—always par- 
tial, always precarious, always challenged. And we should re- 
mind ourselves again that it is in the midst of a situation of cap- 
tivity that freedom can be born, at first in the shape of the 
aspiration to be free. But the word “aspiration” is misleading; 
it can correspond to a simple “I should like” which is separated 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 147 


by an abyss from “I want” (je veux). And in fact we have 
seen that hope is itself irreducible to aspiration, since it im- 
plies a patience, a vigilance, and a firmness of purpose which 
are incompatible with a simple “I should like.” 

To say that the freest man is the one who has the most hope 
is perhaps above all to indicate that he is the man who has been 
able to give his existence the richest significance, or stake the 
most on it. But this is enough to exclude absolutely the pure 
dilettante, that is, the one who, living only for himself, seeks 
solely to collect such experiences as will awaken in him, each 
time with different shades and nuances, a feeling of exaltation 
which fulfills him for that moment. But from such a flame, 
can anything remain in the end but ashes? 

In the line of thought that I have tried to formulate in the 
course of this book, it is evident that the stakes I have alluded 
to here can only be conceived of on the level of intersubjec- 
tivity, or, if you wish, fraternity, and perhaps everything that 
has been said up to now will be clarified if we now postulate 
that the freest man is also the most fraternal. 

But this formula aquires its full meaning only if we bring 
to light the implications of the word “fraternal.” The fraternal 
man is linked to his neighbor, but in such a way that this tie 
not only does not fetter him, but frees him from himself. Now 
what I have tried to show is that this freedom is of primary 
importance, for each one of us tends to become a prisoner of 
himself, not only in respect to his material interests, his pas- 
sions, or simply his prejudices, but still more essentially in the 
predisposition which inclines him to be centered on himself, 
and to view everything only from his own perspective. The 
fraternal man, on the contrary, is somehow enriched by every- 
thing which enriches his brother, in that communion which 
exists between his brother and himself. 

But it is not hard to see the role that hope plays here. For 
to love one’s brothers is above all to have hope in them, that is, 
to go beyond that in their conduct which almost always be- 


148 Gabriel Marcel 


gins by bruising or disappointing us. And on the other hand 
experience undeniably shows that the hope which we put in 
them can help to transform them, while, inversely, if by our 
thought we enclose them in what strikes us as their nature, we 
contribute to stopping their spiritual growth. This is mani- 
festly true for the educator. But there is a sense in which it 
may be said that fraternity implies a mutual education. 

Moreover, it seems to me necessary to stress that fraternity 
excludes the spirit of abstraction and the ideologies in which 
that spirit tends always to be embodied. Here I come back 
to what I said before on the difference between equality and 
fraternity. It might be said that the spirit of abstraction always 
leads to a kind of segregation, the class segregation practiced 
in communist countries being in this respect no better than 
racial segregation. But what is fraternity if not the refusal of 
all forms of segregation? This refusal, of course, is actually 
the negative side of the emphasis placed on the universal. But 
the danger is ever-present, as I have shown, that the universal 
may wither or deteriorate into a purely abstract relation, and 
it is precisely to this deterioration that the spirit of fraternity 
is opposed. Again: fraternity implies a dynamism which is in 
fact that of love, and not—as with equality—that of the recti- 
fying spirit. But this is of course no more than a schematic 
way of presenting an opposition which in concrete reality is 
not always clearly discernible. 

Incidentally, in insisting as I have just done on the connec- 
tion between fraternity and freedom, I do not claim to give an 
exhaustive account of the main characteristics by which the 
free man is defined. On the contrary, I think that one must 
have recourse to definitions of an apparently quite different 
order, and here I refer primarily to the attitude which a free 
man must have toward what is commonly called truth. 

I was struck, a few years ago, by the concurrent testimony 
that I received in 1956 and 1957 about the conditions under 
which the well-known uprisings, first in Poland and then in 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 149 


Hungary, took place. Witnesses affirm that in both countries 
it was the lies accumulated by the respective governments and 
by a servile press which were the last straw. In Hungary, in 
particular, I was told by a diplomat who lived for eight years 
in that country, that what the population rose against was the 
lie, and this, moreover, without being able to say precisely in 
the name of what, positively, the insurrection had taken place. 
Indeed it seems that the Hungarian insurgents knew much 
more clearly what they did not want at any price, what with 
their whole being they rejected, than what they would wish 
to put in the place of the hated régime. 

In reflecting on the relation which might obtain in such 
situations as the foregoing between freedom—or, more pre- 
cisely, liberation—on the one hand, and truth, on the other, 
I asked myself how one might define the positive counterpart 
of a protest against the lie that proved capable in a few days 
of transforming a capital, a whole country, into a battlefield. 

Perhaps this counterpart is the will to be acknowledged— 
that same will which is wounded each time a person is hu- 
miliated. We may recall here the way in which Dostoievski 
in his major works could release the distinctive effects of 
humiliation. The lies which were cynically published in the 
Hungarian press, for example, were bound to be regarded as 
an insult by those who were supposed to accept them and to 
live by them, day after day. 

But on reflection the will to be acknowledged must appear 
without question to be linked with truth, provided one is care- 
ful not to confound truth with what is only brute fact. 

What is it that is unacknowledged here? It is not such data 
as might figure in a dossier at the back of some file; it is rather 
a certain quality which is implied in self-respect. Everything 
happens as if the oppressor proposed to strip the oppressed 
of his self-respect. And from what motive? To him it is sim- 
ply a matter of transforming the individual into a tool which 
is incapable of opposing the ends pursued by the oppressor. 


150 Gabriel Marcel 


But self-respect comprises precisely that stubborn refusal to 
let oneself be degraded to the level of an instrument. 

It is in this connection that the all-too-familiar techniques 
for obtaining a false confession from an accused person take 
on their sinister significance. These mendacious confessions, 
by which the prosecutor himself is not fooled, aim at the de- 
struction from within of him who was yesterday an adversary 
but today a mere tool. The man who has been put under the 
compulsion of professing a lie, usually under the influence of 
torture or blackmail, is in fact dissociated from himself, 
stripped of that kind of consistency between what he is and 
what he says which is at the heart of his self-esteem as a man. 
That is what the expression “to break” means in this connec- 
tion. The torturer, whatever the means he has employed, has 
made of his victim a slave, not only physically but morally. 
The man who has betrayed truth—and by that one must 
understand truth not as a meaningless abstraction, but as one’s 
own truth—can no longer be a free man. 

This observation sheds light on a great many situations 
beyond the one just evoked, however, for it is in this same 
manner that the representatives of a servile press are them- 
selves somehow alienated. Henceforth they are literally with- 
out a home, so well expressed in the German word heimatlos. 

One is bound to notice in this connection that the Marxists 
who, in the footsteps of their master, have so justly stressed 
the alienation of the proletariat, often appear incapable of 
discerning the moral forms of alienation. And when by chance 
they are able to recognize them, they become entangled in in- 
extricable contradictions from which they manage to emerge 
only by a cynicism that often conceals a suppressed despair. 
This was the case, for example, with Bertold Brecht, as his 
recent biographer, Martin Esslin, has so well shown.” 


1 Brecht: A Choice of Evils. A Critical Study of the Man, His Work, and 
His Opinions (London: Eyre & Spottiswoode, 1959). Published in the 
United States under the title, Brecht: The Man and His Work (New York: 
Doubleday, 1960). 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 151 


Reflection on what I have called ‘“‘at-home-ness” allows us, 
further, to clarify some of the concrete conditions apart from 
which there is not and cannot be a freedom worthy of the 
name. The situation of the refugee may be brought to mind, 
even where it does not involve entire dependence on what is 
rather called public charity. What is characteristic in the 
plight of the refugee is that he is en porte-d-faux “without 
support.” ° This does not mean, simply, that he is not inte- 
grated into the community, but perhaps more exactly that just 
because he feels himself tolerated, after a fashion, he has to 
watch his words and even his very thoughts. 

From a similar perspective, it must be said that the trans- 
fers of populations, which are multiplied in our day in coun- 
tries which have the impudence to call themselves democratic, 
are crimes against humanity, for they too threaten that deep 
and distinctive need of man which consists in wanting not 
only his inner consistency but also an adjustment to his own 
milieu that shall be at least partly self-determined. This point 
seems to me to be particularly important because it puts us on 
guard against the idealist’s temptation to identify truth with 
pure interiority. On this point Hegelianism and Marxism must 
be credited with having exposed an illusion which is today no 
longer tenable. But this in no way gives us license to go to the 
other extreme and neglect or minimize the role of subjectivity 
in favor of exclusive attention to the material conditions in 
which a man develops. 

Nor should we take refuge in compromise formulas that are 
always deceptive. The truth is that it is impossible to conceive 
of freedom without emphasis on a whole congerie of condi- 
tions, so complex as to verge on the contradictory, which each 
of us is obliged both to experience and to dominate, without, 
however, cherishing the hope of being able to do so absolutely, 
whether with respect to oneself or to circumstances. 


Sen porte-d-faux: a French architectural expression the literal meaning 
of which is “overhang.” 


152 Gabriel Marcel 


In this perspective, nothing seems more absurd than to treat 
freedom as an attribute, when it can never be more than a 
partial and precarious victory. To become aware of this, we 
have only to imagine the confusion into which each of us 
would be plunged if we were asked, “Are you free?” To such 
a question no answer is possible, because in fact the question 
is meaningless. It can only take on meaning if it becomes spe- 
cific. Suppose, instead, that I am asked, “Do you consider that 
such and such a step was freely taken—for instance, with 
reference to your career?” Even in this case a reflection cen- 
tered on the existential, that is, no longer obsessed with causal- 
ity—an obsession from which contemporary thought, espe- 
cially that of Bergson, has helped to free us—will bring to 
light the difficulties involved in trying to answer such a ques- 
tion honestly. Let us imagine, for example, the case of a man 
who, without any wish to do so, is obliged to study medicine 
merely because his father, himself aged or ill, has passionately 
desired his son to succeed him in the practice of that profes- 
sion. If you should ask this young man, “Do you consider that 
you have freely chosen this profession?” he would no doubt 
be greatly embarrassed. He would certainly acknowledge hav- 
ing undergone pressure from his father, but it is possible that 
he would refuse absolutely to consider that pressure as a con- 
straint, or coactio. Perhaps he would ascribe to affection or to 
a sense of duty what others would interpret rather as black- 
mail, and so he would refuse to admit that his choice was not 
a free one. But it must be understood as well—and this point 
seems to me most important, bearing as it does on what I have 
said previously in connection with Un Homme de Dieu—that 
perhaps in the actual content of life his own way of inter- 
preting his choice in retrospect would be considerably modi- 
fied. If his professional life is a failure, if he perceives that he 
should in fact have oriented his existence quite differently, it 
is probable that he will be inclined to lay stress, resentfully, 
on the pressure suffered, which would appear a posteriori as 


Mortality, Hope, and Freedom 153 


a constraint. The reverse would be the case if, having taken 
a liking to his work, he has on the contrary found success in 
it and is satisfied that his life has been worthwhile. 

Along these lines, one might be tempted to say that the es- 
sential question can be formulated only in a personal form, 
and in the first person, and only from that moment where our 
life stretches behind us like a well-traveled landscape, recon- 
structing the progress—so often halting and problematic—that 
has been ours. At that moment, it seems to me, we can ask our- 
selves, “Am I conscious of having been a free man?” Certainly 
it is then that the question takes on meaning, although it is 
manifestly impossible to answer it by a simple yes or no. 


IX < 


The Threat to Integrity 


f is perhaps appropriate that in this final chapter I should 
ask myself the difficult and disturbing question which I 
formulated at the end of the preceding chapter: Having come 
to a point where almost all my life is behind me, can I in all 
sincerity say that this life—my own—has been that of a free 
man? Or, in other words, have I the impression that in the 
course of this long existence the willed had pre-eminence over 
the suffered? In the first place, I am aware that in principle it 
would seem that I alone can decide the matter. How could 
someone else—a commentator or a biographer—enter by 
thought or imagination into my existence so as to answer the 
question I have posed? On the other hand, reflecting on the 
way in which I have formulated the question, I am obliged 
to own that it is open to this criticism—that it seems to estab- 
lish a relation of quantitative inequality between the wiled 
and the suffered; and one must ask whether, in this domain, 
such a relation is really thinkable. 

Pursuing my self-questioning, I wonder to what degree this 
completed life, as I consider it to be, might appear to me today 
as having fulfilled, or not, a certain initial choice. I realize that 
it is impossible to answer this question in the affirmative, as 
I would be able to do if ambition had been an overriding con- 

154 


The Threat to Integrity 155 


sideration with me from the beginning—in other words, if 
I had been concerned to climb a certain number of stairs. In 
that event I could, like an Alpinist who has or has not climbed 
a certain peak which he wanted to be the first to scale, answer 
in an unambiguous way: Yes, I have (or, no, I have not) at- 
tained to such and such a height. Here, I am purposely ignor- 
ing the question of whether such a climb is not inevitably 
accompanied by a whole train of sorrows and disappointments 
which were scarcely imagined when setting out. And I might 
note in passing that the man whose acts are dictated by this 
kind of ambition is frequently the prisoner of an obsession 
and runs the grave risk of being unable at the end to regard 
himself as a free man. It seems, however, that when I had 
my whole life still ahead of me, it did not present itself to me 
as a ladder I had to climb—still less so since competition, as 
I had experienced it in my student days, has always appeared 
hateful to me. This fact, incidentally, explains in some degree 
perhaps the very special conditions under which my existence 
gradually unfolded. This does not mean, of course, that I was 
without ambition. To make such a disclaimer would be en- 
tirely deceitful. But this ambition could not be dissociated in 
any way from the profound need to proffer a certain word— 
and I quote here some verses from one of the Grandes Odes of 
Paul Claudel which to my view express in an incomparable 
way that kind of aspiration: 


Let me be among men as a person without face and my 
Word upon them without the least sound, like a 
sower of silence, like a sower of shadows, 
like a sower of churches, 
Like a sower of God’s measure. 
Like a small grain of unknown kind 
Which, cast upon good earth, gathers from it all 
its energies and makes a particular plant, 
Complete with roots and all.1 


*From the ode entitled “La Maison Fermée,” in Cing Grandes Odes, 43rd 
ed. (Paris: Gallimard, Pleiad, 1948). 


156 Gabriel Marcel 


There is admittedly some pretention, some presumption, in- 
volved in daring to ascribe to oneself in some way the creative 
resolution which is expressed here by a poet of genius. But 
such terms as “sower of silence” and “ower of solitude” de- 
scribe very well what I have tried to be, and, too, they make 
it possible to see just how difficult it is for me to answer the 
question I posed at the beginning. We are as far as it is possi- 
ble to be from the case of the artist who can say, “My picture 
was recently sold for fifty million francs to the Galerie Char- 
pentier,” or, “My last play had a run of fifteen hundred per- 
formances,” and so on. In other words, the response to such 
a vocation cannot, by definition, be computed in terms of 
measure, of number. What counts, and what moreover can 
be discerned only imperfectly by oneself, is the fact of one’s 
having found an echo in very diverse people, often widely 
separated and scattered over the four corners of the earth. It 
is a question, however, whether these people constitute in any 
way that species of opaque and rather suspect entity which 
is called a “public.” I would be less than honest if I did not 
acknowledge that this response has in a sense existed and exists, 
without there being any possibility of determining its ampli- 
tude or depth. There is in this area something which by defini- 
tion escapes investigation or inquiry, in the same sense that an 
essential human relation does, be it one of friendship or of love. 

Have I, then, achieved exactly what I wished? Surely it 
would be false to make that claim, if only because the end- 
result was unforeseeable in any case. But perhaps it would be 
proper here to make a distinction in depth between wishing 
and willing. Without any doubt I would have wished to be 
a dramatic author with a success comparable to Roussin or 
Anouilh; but what I willed was, no less clearly, incompatible 
with that sort of success, and I can at least say to myself that 
never, in any one of my plays or in any circumstance, have 
I deliberately sought to realize the conditions which would 
have made it possible for me to achieve this commercial suc- 


The Threat to Integrity 157 


cess. And it is in no sense certain that even had I willed it I 
should have been capable of realizing my ambition. 

So what I can recognize in retrospect as freedom’s part 
seems to me to coincide with that of creativity itself. Actually, 
all sorts of questions can arise, not only about the nature of 
this creativity but also about its limits. Certainly it is not nec- 
essary to be a Marxist to recognize that the latter depended 
to some extent on the milieu in which I have lived, and I feel 
no embarrassment in admitting that this has been a bourgeois 
one, and that my dramatic characters have belonged to the 
milieu which was my own, not at all because they thereby 
enjoyed in my eyes any special prestige, but because this was 
the one which I knew from the inside. It would have seemed 
dishonest to me at any time to want to stage my plays in a 
setting which I knew only through hearsay or through read- 
ing. I must add that it will continue to be a source of regret 
to me, and to a certain degree even of remorse, not to have 
had contact with the working-class milieu, for example. This 
was not due to any wish of mine but was the result of circum- 
stances, in particular the dubious state of health which ex- 
empted me from the obligation of military service. And here 
I would have to go into a host of details, both tedious and in- 
discreet in order to make clear, in the heart of an existence 
like my own, the inextricable entanglement of the willed and 
the suffered. 

Turning now from this self-examination, I should lke to 
consider briefly an objection which might justifiably be made 
in connection with the text of Claudel that I have quoted. Is 
there not a contradiction, one might ask, between what has 
been said earlier about fraternity and its pre-eminent value, 
and this concern to be a sower of solitude or of silence? The 
contradiction is, I believe, only apparent, or—more precisely 
—it implies a confusion to which I believe it is essential to 
call attention. The word “solitude” is ambiguous. It does not, 
in fact, mean isolation, for isolation is a lack, a deprivation, 


158 Gabriel Marcel 


whereas solitude is a fullness. In the world whose structure 
is displayed about us, developing at a rate which is not that of 
organic growth, we find human beings increasingly separated 
from one another the more they are herded together. But this 
promiscuous closeness that we see, for example, on beaches, 
where people crowd in together during vacations, has nothing 
to do with fraternity. And it is surely not by chance that it is 
accompanied by an uproar so deafening that no one feels at 
home. The same holds true for those enormous housing proj- 
ects which spring up like mushrooms on the outskirts of big 
cities; there, too, promiscuity and tumult prevail. My thought 
would be best expressed by saying that solitude is as essential 
to fraternity as silence is to music. We should remember that 
fraternity is perhaps above all a form of respect, and that there 
is no respect without distance, which in this case means that 
every human being must have access to an interior space with- 
out which he withers like a plant, or a tree. Need we be re- 
minded of this in the country of Thoreau and Emerson? 

But we must also bear in mind that these truths are acknowl- 
edged less and less, or, more precisely, that forces are at work 
which are tending to stamp upon existence a character such 
that they can no longer be lived. 

Here we touch upon the especially grave and agonizing 
problem to which I would like to devote this final chapter, 
well aware, however, that I shall not be able to supply any- 
thing in the nature of a solution. There are, I believe, pro- 
found reasons here which militate against the very notion of 
“solution.” 

The problem in question is that of understanding what be- 
comes of human dignity in the process of technicalization to 
which man today is delivered over. Never, of course, have 
such words as “human dignity,” “the human person,” and 
so on, been more constantly enunciated, but to draw from 
that a positive conclusion about any real situation to which 
this language has reference would be to succumb to a strange 


The Threat to Integrity 159 


illusion. How can one escape the conviction that we are in 
fact witnessing a widespread deterioration which this sort of 
verbal inflation seems unconsciously aimed at compensating 
on a level of verbal pretence? What is certainly true is that 
we see today, heightened and generalized, a tendency to view 
any kind of service as incompatible with what I believe should 
be called a basic pretension. But the real problem is to know 
what relation this pretension bears to that concept which 
rightfully deserves the name of human dignity. 

Of course there can be no denying that the exploitation of 
the servant by the master, as it has manifested itself through 
the centuries, rightly seems to us today to be unjustifiable. 
From that fact it does not at all follow that service itself should 
be considered humiliating. On this point many people have 
been the victims of a most unfortunate confusion. It would 
seem at present that each man intends to constitute—some- 
times, but not necessarily always, with those whom he still 
calls his own people—a sort of island of autonomy which 
surely has nothing in common with the autonomy that Kant 
put at the heart of his ethic. Besides, the very term “autonomy” 
is inadequate here since it implies nothing in the nature of a 
self-imposed rule, but rather of a will to pleasure, the onl 
restraint on tastes and inclinations being the fear of the law. 
This kind of self-enclosedness distorts to the point of con- 
tradiction Kant’s rule of the autonomous practical categorical. 

But it must be added at once—and this is probably the most 
noteworthy factor—that technology looms as more and more 
indispensable to the realization of the design of increasing uni- 
formity, variations from which can only become progres- 
sively ineffectual. I cannot resist the temptation to quote here 
a few lines from an article by the Roumanian essayist E. M. 
Gioran, which have a diagnostic value: “So-called civiliza- 
tion teaches us how to take possession of things, when it should 
initiate us into the art of letting go, for there is neither free- 
dom nor ‘real life’ without an apprenticeship in ‘de-possession.’ 


160 Gabriel Marcel 


I take hold of an object, I reckon myself the master of it; in 
fact, I am its slave, as I am equally the slave of the instrument 
which I manufacture and wield.” Here I would introduce a 
distinction which Gioran seems inadvertently to overlook: 
To the degree that I manufacture the instrument, or simply 
contribute to its perfecting, it seems an exaggeration to say 
that I am its slave; in any case, I am much less so than he who 
only makes use of it. 

From this digression we return to that idea which has been 
one of the basic themes of our whole inquiry, namely, that 
to some extent there is freedom wherever there is creation, 
even on the humblest levels. (This assertion, which appears 
to me necessary, does not significantly modify the diagnosis 
of Mr. Gioran.) The great majority of men are merely con- 
sumers and to that extent wholly dependent. They are thereby 
self-condemned to a new kind of slavery the true nature of 
which is, moreover, concealed from itself. Nor should we 
overlook the fact that this slavery is actually a consequence 
of the omnipresence of advertising, which is itself organically 
connected with industrial development. Those who produce 
television sets or refrigerators must be able to create an en- 
vironment capable of absorbing them. All this has been said 
a thousand times and there is no need to stress it again. But 
it is none the less relevant in this context to ask what the by- 
products of such a situation may be, not only with reference 
to the behavior of human beings but to the way they consider 
and evaluate themselves. Now it is, in my view, a certainty— 
on which the German philosopher Gunther Anders, in his 
book, Der Antiquiertheit des Menschen,’ has shed a brilliant 
light—that man is tending more and more to consider himself 
in relation to the products of his own techniques, and by a 
singular paradox he even undervalues himself in comparison 
with the far more precise and effective apparatus which his 
technical skill has perfected. This anomaly is an extension of 


? Munich: Beck, 1956. 


The Threat to Integrity 161 


the prophetic insights which Samuel Butler articulated in his 
Erebwon. But this tendency is bound to have moral conse- 
quences that are incalculable, since that kind of self-apprecia- 
tion—or, rather, self-depreciation—leads to the radical nega- 
tion of the transcendence which classical philosophy, or one 
might even say philosophia perennis, attributed to the mind 
as distinct from the body. Actually, what tends to replace 
mind is the notion of a more or less rigorous technological 
function. 

It goes without saying that up to now I have simplified the 
problem in a way which distorts contemporary human reality, 
in seeming to leave aside, or in only alluding to, the social 
side of this same reality. Even if one individual should have 
the illusion of really being the center, endowed with a self- 
sufficiency which technical progress aims to facilitate, it is all 
too plain that this illusion cannot for a moment withstand 
the pressure of fact. It is also clear that the simplistic notion 
of what we call “society” as merely the arithmetical sum of 
individuals is not a tenable one. Surely society has quite an- 
other character; it has generally the aspect of what Simone 
Weil called “the great beast,” this expression having, if I am not 
mistaken, a Platonic origin. And this means that each of us, 
however he may desire to do what he pleases, is integrated 
into a certain totality, of which it must further be said that the 
diverse feelings which it inspires, ranging ordinarily between 
fear and aversion, scarcely seem any longer to carry with 
them that shade of admiration or of quasi-religious submission 
without which a philosophy of the state, however short of 
optimism, seems unable to take form. 

Here the difficult question must be asked—namely, what 
relation should hold between the bureaucracy’s development 
and the growing technicalization of which we are the wit- 
nesses, or even the victims? As always in matters of this kind, 
we should be wary of oversimplified conclusions. There is 
no doubt, for example, that bureaucracy can develop in the 


162 Gabriel Marcel 


most extreme and paralyzing fashion in countries that are still 
technically underdeveloped. But on the other hand one may 
well fear—although such a development is not inevitable— 
that technocracy implies a tendency toward centralization, 
and that the operation of this central authority cannot be 
separated from a corresponding hypertrophy of offices and 
therefore of bureaucracy. I say that all this is perhaps not in- 
evitable since we now have, for example, in France, a clear- 
sighted technocratic effort to achieve the industrial decentrali- 
zation that is obviously needed. But it is also apparent that that 
effort is encountering the greatest difficulties, and, one may 
say, a sort of generalized ill-will on the part of the public, 
which tends increasingly to crowd into enormous urban cen- 
ters under conditions that are least favorable for what a few 
years ago we would still have called the development of the 
individual. But this word “development” becomes really mean- 
ingful only if the integrity of the human being is considered 
as the central value—and it is precisely this integrity which is 
directly threatened today. Here we rediscover the problem 
formulated earlier, for I believe it is possible to show that 
integrity and dignity are terms which, though not identical, 
are indissolubly linked. 

The notion of integrity is one which deserves a more com- 
plete elucidation than is generally given it. When we say that 
a man has integrity we usually want to emphasize the fact 
that he is absolutely honest, that there are in him no fissures 
through which temptation can enter. But the etymology of 
the word suggests that integrity has a more essential quality. 
As usual, the thought of the ancients is relevant here. The 
integrated man is master of himself; he is in perfect possession 
of himself. It must be added at once, however, that this does 
not in any sense imply complacency or self-sufficiency. I 
would even go so far as to think that the man who proudly 
proclaims this self-sufficiency usually suffers unawares from 
an inner wound or deficiency which he seeks in this way to 


The Threat to Integrity 163 


compensate. But we cannot be sure that such was the case 
with some of the wise men of antiquity whose sociological 
and existential context was so far removed from our own. And 
I am willing to acknowledge that even today, here and there, 
might be found survivors of this mentality, the beneficiaries 
of exceptional conditions comparable in some measure to those 
more common in antiquity. But we cannot avoid being struck 
by the fact that in our world the men who claim self-suffi- 
ciency generally have recourse to modes of escape which are 
all too familiar, be they alcohol, drugs, or sheer speed, the 
latter patently taking on the character of alcohol, a drug, or 
quite simply, poison. But we can speak of integrity only where 
such escapism is systematically excluded. We are faced, then, 
with this question: In a world in the process of complete tech- 
nicalization, does not such escapism appear less and less avoid- 
able, which would imply that the integrity of which I am 
speaking is increasingly threatened? 

Clearly, it is not a question here of implication in the precise 
sense of the term. Rather we should ask whether, in such a 
world, the individual is not increasingly in danger of succumb- 
ing to this temptation. Are we not in the presence of a uni- 
versal alienation, taking this word in the widest sense, and 
not in the narrow meaning conferred on it by Marx and the 
Marxists? Alienation here refers to the fact that in a world 
increasingly under the hegemony of technology, the human 
being is undergoing what might be called an enucleation. Need 
I say that we are rediscovering here, transposed in the light 
of the most recent developments, the views which I formu- 
lated more than a quarter of a century ago, not in reference 
to technology but rather as a criticism of the hypertrophy 
of what is merely functional or functionalized. It might also 
be said, in a language that is convergent with the foregoing, 
that in such a world the life of each of us tends to lose its ex- 
istential weight because circumstances which formerly would 
have been taken in their intrinsic seriousness now tend to be 


164 Gabriel Marcel 


interpreted in terms of adjustment or maladjustment. To take 
only one example: if someone suffers too deep and too lasting 
a grief after the death of someone near to him, there would 
be no hesitation, in the contemporary framework I am speak- 
ing of, in calling the reaction a morbid one, and it is all too 
clear that the morbid or the abnormal refers to a trespassing 
upon certain rules of self-adjustment to the inevitable. We 
should recognize that what is involved here is a sort of degra- 
dation of the stoicism of Epictetus or Seneca to the merely 
functional level. Whatever one may think of stoicism—and 
to me it has always seemed metaphysically rather shallow— 
it none the less implies the affirmation of sovereignty, of a 
hegemonikon, which occupies a place considerably above any 
possible technique. There is no common ground between this 
stoicism and an indistinguishable mixture ranging from a spe- 
cies of pelmanist gymnastics to some dubious residue of yoga. 

What must be stringently insisted upon is that an anthropol- 
ogy with a functionalist commitment has no place for anything 
in the nature of dignity, and if illusions can be entertained 
on this point it is solely because language allows for anything, 
because anything can be expressed. But we should be quick to 
acknowledge that an anthropology of this order is not implied 
by communist regimes alone, but tends to assert itself wher- 
ever a technocratic type of thought is affirmed, for such 
thought tends inevitably to treat the human individual exclu- 
sively in terms of the return which he is likely to yield. And 
what is this return if not a contribution to a certain world- 
wide enterprise? But in what terms is that enterprise to be 
conceived? Actually, as we know only too well, it runs the 
risk of becoming itself the extravagant dream, or even the 
criminal folly, of an individual or of a small group of men tem- 
porarily united by the same ambition. No doubt the objection 
will be made that this is a phenomenon of social or historical 
pathology, and that we ought nevertheless to rise to the con- 
ception of an entire society devoted to the pursuit of certain 


The Threat to Integrity 165 


ends. But it is precisely here that the problem re-emerges: For 
what is the nature and the value of these ends? Who is a fit 
judge of their value? And, on a deeper level, does the word 
“value” retain any meaning in such a context? It is only by 
fiction pure and simple that certain philosophers have given 
credence to the unfortunate notion that society, or a society, 
can be considered capable of positing values. 

But all these assertions and questions, each of which opens 
the way to further ramifications, will, I think, be clarified by 
the following reflections. It is necessary to see what sort of 
self-image man fashions when he tends to picture the world 
in the light of the techniques that it has been given to him to 
invent. It is true that this image is more and more confused, 
misshapen, indecipherable, and that this distortion entails in- 
calculable consequences for self-knowledge. The Socratic 
gnoti seauton was, after all, based on the idea of an identity 
of the knower and the known; and the principle of the identity 
of the ideal and the real thereby postulated was, in the last 
analysis, the foundation of the whole of traditional philoso- 
phy from Plato to Descartes to Hegel. But is not this postulate 
annulled, for all practical purposes, by the hyperbolic enlarge- 
ment of technical skills—that is to say, of “know-how?” Does 
not the explosion of the objective world whose physiognomy 
is increasingly strange and threatening, entail in fact a pul- 
verization of the subject? I mean to say that the techniques 
conceived on the model of those whose efficacy was demon- 
strated in the realm of nature will now be applied to the sub- 
ject himself, who will, by the same token, cease to be treated 
as a subject. To realize this, we need only think of the experi- 
ments on the brain and of the psychic alterations they seem 
able to provoke. In such cases we are witnessing the constant 
and widespread violation of privacy which is without ques- 
tion one of the most alarming features of the present world. 
We need only recall, for instance, the scandalous “breaking 
and entering” which is involved in the use of what is, con- 


166 Gabriel Marcel 


tradictorily, called “truth serum”—as if truth in the pure and 
noble sense of the word had anything to do with the possible 
results of an injection of any kind. Surely it is not by chance 
that such experiments were made with unprecedented enthu- 
siasm and persistence by totalitarian regimes, of which it is not 
enough to say simply that they are careless of truth, but rather 
that truth for them is the prime enemy, for by its light the 
inadmissible pretensions which operate in these regimes are re- 
vealed for what they are. 

In this digression we have encountered once again that es- 
sential tie between man’s dignity and the respect for truth 
which I have tried to emphasize. Historically, those values 
have always been in conflict with the same kind of sacrilege, 
so that we may say without hesitation that the countless crimes 
of which totalitarian dictatorships have been guilty should, 
by a sort of salutary reversal, lead those who have retained 
some lucidity of mind to become aware of these fundamental 
interconnections, attention to which must inevitably have a 
beneficial effect upon the whole human person. 

Nevertheless, we must entertain no illusions here: this atten- 
tion or reflection has increasing difficulty in operating today; 
it is systematically discouraged—or, more precisely, whoever 
makes an effort to guide his thought in this direction finds 
himself exposed to a general strategy of intimidation which 
is advanced now in the name of sociology, now, much more 
absurdly, in the name of something which still claims to be 
history but which is in fact a totally dubious by-product of 
history. Weare really witnessing a gigantic process of devalua- 
tion of what is permanent in man and above man, and the term 
“desacralization,” to which I have had frequent recourse in 
my writings, seems the most accurate description of this proc- 
ess. 

It would appear, then, that we should look exclusively in 
the direction of a restoration of the sacred for what I must 
stop short of calling a remedy for the situation I have tried 


The Threat to Integrity 167 


to describe. If I prefer not to speak of a remedy it is because 
by doing so one would risk slipping into a sort of pragmatism 
of the sacred, which would constitute an offense against the 
very thing one intended to restore. Here we encounter once 
again what I was alluding to at the beginning of this chapter 
when I said that we should beware of believing that such a 
problem is soluble. Perhaps what I mean will be clearer if we 
reflect on the meaning of a conversion worthy of the name, 
by which I understand an absolutely sincere and spontaneous 
conversion at the heart of an individual existence. Consider 
how absurd it would be to say to a convert: “You have found 
a solution to your difficulties,” or, “You have found a remedy 
for your ills.” It is not merely the words “solution” and “‘rem- 
edy” which are improper, it is the verb “to find” which is 
empty of meaning. The convert would undoubtedly reply: 
“I have not found, Z have been found.” In other words, he 
would rightfully point out that everything is explained—or, 
more precisely, illuminated—by the idea of grace, and by the 
fact that he did not refuse that grace. 

Here, however, the reader must be cautioned against any 
possible misinterpretation of my thought. If I have alluded 
to conversion it was simply to show how a certain kind of 
experience can take place beyond the level of solutions; I am 
by no means asserting that men will only be able to emerge 
from the impasse in which they are visibly caught on condi- 
tion that they return to religion in its standard and confes- 
sional forms. To make such an assertion would be to fall into 
the pragmatism which I wish most to avoid. 

Let us say, to begin with, that it would be not only pre- 
sumptious but, properly speaking, absurd, to claim to be sup- 
plying anything in the nature of a formula. It is precisely the 
idea of a formula of any kind that I intended to challenge. 
The philosopher—and it is, after all, as a philosopher that I 
have been expressing myself in the course of this book, even, 
and perhaps most of all, when I have referred to my dramatic 


168 Gabriel Marcel 


work—the philosopher must preserve himself completely 
from the temptation of the prophet’s role; the man who wants 
to play the prophet is behaving as a charlatan, and here, as 
elsewhere, charlatanism in any form must repel us. I would 
concede, incidentally, that here the philosopher is obliged to 
exercise continuous vigilance, for he is constantly exposed to 
this pitfall. “But,” some of my readers will ask, “when you 
venture to speak of grace, are you not in some sense open to 
the reproach which you have just invoked?” I have not the 
temerity or the complacency to demur categorically; as is 
so often the case, language here is suspect and perhaps in- 
criminating. I readily acknowledge that the word “grace” 
is charged with all sorts of associations that carry the risk of 
unfortunate connotation. A whole literature of edification, 
whose intelligible content amounts to very little, tends to 
envelop in mist the author of such words. As always—yes, I 
venture to say always—it is experience and experience alone 
which has the last word here. The philosopher—and I would 
write the word without capitals—is the man who comes, not 
without trembling, to share with those who are willing to hear 
him out a certain experience which it was given to him to 
undergo. And of this experience he observes that no under- 
standing can be achieved without taking account of that mys- 
terious and essentially discrete reality which is called grace, 
and which is primarily defined, not merely by its irreduci- 
bility to freedom, but rather by the secret stimulus which 
emanates from it and without which it is likely that freedom 
itself would lose its meaning. 

This would indicate—contrary to the opinion of those who, 
sometimes justifiably, have stigmatized the pride, the hubris, 
of the philosopher—that he has today the duty not merely 
to practice to the utmost the virtue of humility, which for 
obvious reasons is at the present time so generally discredited, 
but, further, that he must strive to bring into the open the re- 
deeming value which it possesses, in a world where the ma- 


The Threat to Integrity 169 


nipulation of techniques in the service of the will to power 
threatens, in the absence of any counterweight, to engender 
pride, madness, and death. 

This further implies that in my view the essential function 
of the philosopher is that of the sower, a function which prob- 
ably cannot be performed except in the intimacy of the dia- 
logue, inter paucos. And it is plain that in this connection it is 
to the lesson of Socrates that our thoughts necessarily turn. 


I am writing these lines in the middle of the month of July 
1961. In the course of these last weeks storm clouds have ac- 
cumulated without respite on our horizons. None the less, 
something stubbornly assures us that the worst can yet be 
avoided without paying the price of a dishonorable capitula- 
tion the consequences of which could only be disastrous. This 
assurance is valid, for it is in the order not of desire, but of 
hope, as I have sought to define it. To attempt to silence it 
would be to shut ourselves within that circle of fatality which 
tends always to close around us but from which we must, day 
after day, release ourselves: we are men only on that condi- 
tion. 

To be men; to continue to remain men. These are the words 
on which I have concentrated unceasingly for twenty years. 
A Russian visitor told me recently that I was scathingly criti- 
cized recently in the leading Soviet literary journal, which 
accused me of being interested only in death, of being turned 
toward death, as is natural, I believe they said, for a repre- 
sentative of a bourgeois civilization in the final throes. I be- 
lieve that the reader will have seen how absurd this accusation 
is. It is precisely my unconquerable love of life that precludes 
my subscribing to what I would call the “mortalism” of those 
for whom man finally breaks down like a machine. 

These thoughts are perhaps particularly worth meditating 
upon in an hour when we have no assurance that millions or 
tens of millions of us are not destined for destruction. Even 


170 Gabriel Marcel 


if the worst cannot be avoided—and it is not at all certain 
that it can be indefinitely—I believe that whatever may have 
been our shortcomings, our omissions—and I am by no means 
granting myself a blank check in the matter—we have to 
recollect with gratitude all that has been given us in our brief 
or long existence by a power which it seems to me unneces- 
sary to name, as the token of a life worthy of the name—that 
is to say, a life both creative and fraternal. Creative and fra- 
ternal: it is with their union that I would like to close, as on 
a keynote in a Mozart quartet or symphony whose echo long 
re-echoes in us and remains not only in our ear, but in our 
heart; not only as a memory, but as a promise of eternity— 
the only eternity worthy of being hoped for and affirmed. 


Authors Works Cited 
Index 


Author's Works Cited 


Philosophical Works 


Being and Having, trans. Katharine Farrer, Westminster: Dacre Press, 
1949; Boston: Beacon Press, 1951. Published in French as Etre et 
avoir, Paris: Aubier, 1935. 

Le Déclin de la sagesse, Paris: Plon, 1954. Published in English as The 
Decline of Wisdom, trans. M. Harari, London: Harvill Press, 1954; 
Chicago: H. Regnery, 1955. 

Du refus à Pinvocation, Paris, Gallimard, 1940. To be published in the 
United States by the Noonday Press under the title Creative Fidelity. 

Fragments philosophiques, 1909-1914, Louvain: Nauwelaerts, 1962. 

L’Homme problématique, Paris: Aubier, 1955. 

Homo Viator: Introduction to a Metaphysic of Hope, trans. E. Crau- 
furd, London: Gollancz, 1951; Chicago: H. Regnery, 1951. Pub- 
lished in French as Homo Viator: prolégoménes à une métaphysique 
de Pespérance, Paris: Aubier, 1947. 

“The Influence of Psychic Phenomena on My Philosophy,” Society 
for Psychical Research (London), 1956. Twelfth Frederic W. H. 
Myers Memorial Lecture, 1955. 

Man against Humanity, trans. G. S. Fraser, London: Harvill Press, 
1952. Published in the United States as Man against Mass Society, 
Chicago: H. Regnery, 1952, and in France as Les Hommes contre 
Phumain, Paris: La Colombe, 1951. 

Metaphysical Journal, trans. Bernard Wall, London: Barrie and Rock- 
liff, 1952; Chicago: H. Regnery, 1952. Published in French as Journal 
métaphysique, Paris, Gallimard, 1927. 

The Mystery of Being, trans. G. S. Fraser, London: Harvill Press, 
1950-1951; Chicago: H. Regnery, 1950-1951. Published in French 
as Le Mystére de Pétre, Paris: Aubier, 1951. 

Philosophy of Existence, trans. M. Harari, London: Harvill Press, 
1948; New York: Philosophical Library, 1949. Published in French 
as Position et approches concrètes du mystère ontologique. Introduc- 
tion by Marcel de Corte. Louvain: Nauwelaerts, 1949. 

Présence et immortalité, Paris: Flammarion, 1959. 


173 


174 Gabriel Marcel 


Recherche de la famille; essai sur “Pétre familial,” G. Marcel et al., Paris: 
Fditions familiales de France, 1949. 

Royce’s Metaphysics, trans. Virginia and Gordon Ringer, Chicago: 
Regnery, 1956. 


Plays 


Ariadne, trans. R. Heywood in B. Ulanov, Makers of the Modern 
Theater, New York, 1961, pp. 547-600. Published in French as Le 
Chemin de créte, Paris: Grasset, 1936. 

La Chapelle ardente in Trois Pièces with Le Regard neuf and Le Mort 
de demain, Paris: Plon, 1931. 

Le Coeur des autres, Paris: Grasset, 1921. 

Les Cœurs avides (Le Soif), Paris: La Table Ronde, 1952. 

Le Dard, Paris: Plon, 1938. 

L’Emissaire, published in Vers un autre royaume, Paris: Plon, 1949. 

La Grace, published with Le Palais de sable in Le Seuil invisible, Paris: 
Grasset, 1914. 

L’Horizon, Paris: Spes, 1945. 

Un Homme de Dieu, Paris: Grasset, 1925. Published in England in 
A Man of God. Ariadne. The Funeral Pyre. Three Plays with a 
Preface on the Drama of the Soul in Exile, London: Secker & War- 
burg, 1952. First American edition: Three Plays: A Man of God, 
Ariadne, The Funeral Pyre, New York: Hill and Wang, 1958. 

L’Iconoclaste, Paris: Delamain, Boutelleau, 1923. 

L’Insondable, published in Présence et immortalité, Paris: Flammarion, 
1959. 

Le Monde cassé, Paris: Desclée de Brouwer, 1933. 

Le Quatuor en fa diése, Paris: Plon, 1925. 


Other Plays by Gabriel Marcel 


Croissez et multipliez, Paris: Plon, 1955. 

Le Fanal, Paris: Stock, 1936. 

La Dimension Florestan, Paris: Plon, 1956. 

Mon temps n'est pas le vôtre, Paris: Plon, 1955. 

Rome west plus dans Rome, Paris: La Table Ronde, 1951. 

Le Signe de la Croix, first published with L’Emissaire (see above) and 
separately (Paris: Plon) in 1961. 

Le Théâtre Comique, which includes four plays: Colombyre, or Le 
Brasier de la Paix; La Double Expertise; Les Points sur les I; Le 
Divertissement posthume. Paris: Albin Michel, 1947. 


Index 


Abel, Niels Henrik, 13 
Absolute Knowledge (concept of), 


22 

Absolute Self (concept of), 101 

Abstraction, 13-14, 20-22, 23; “spirit 
of,” 123, 124, 148; and ethics, 47-48 

Admiration, necessity of, 126 

Alain (Emile-Auguste Chartier), 27, 
140 

Alienation: concept of, 96; in modern 
society, 150-151, 163 

Anders, Gunther. See Stern, Gunther 

Anouilh, Jean, 156 

Anxiety, 16~17, 103 

Appearance and Reality. See Bradley, 
Francis H. 


Bach, Johann Sebastian, 26 

Beethoven, Ludwig von, 26, 120 

Being: definition of, 76-78, 83, 88- 
89; and sensation, 44-45; and fidel- 
ity, 64, 65-66; vs. having, 97-98. See 
also Existence 

Being and Having, 64, 69, 74, 80, 82 

Being and Nothingness. See Sartre, 
Jean-Paul 

Belief, 72-73, 99-100, 113; and soli- 
darity, 133-134. See also Faith 

Bergson, Henri, 1, 2, 19, 35, 42, 76, 
128, 152 

Berkeley, George (Bishop), 111 

Betrayal, 64-73 passim, 120 

Body: and the “I,” 45-47; possession 
of, 97, 98 

Blondel, Maurice, 23 

Blum, Léon, 114 

Bradley, Francis H., 21, 22, 41 

Brecht, Bertold, 150 

Brunschvig, Leon, 25, 27, 42 

Buber, Martin, 4, 39 

Bultmann, Rudolph, 72 


175 


Bureaucracy, 161ff. See also Mass 
society 
Butler, Samuel, 161 


Cain, Seymour, 82 

Chapelle ardente, La, 62, 103-107 

Chemin de créte, Le, 61, 107, 111- 
113, 115 

Claudel, Paul, 155, 157 

Coeur des autres, Le, 62 

Caeurs avides, Les, 134, 137 

Communism, 123 

Commitment: political and ideolog- 
ical, 36, 119-122; unconditional, 
71-72, 74 

Compassion, 106-107, 134-135, 137 

Concreteness (experience), 14-15, 
20-21, 96 

Conversion, 167 

Corneille, Pierre, 143 

Creativity, 126-127; in philosophy, 
9-13 passim 

Curel, François de, 28 


Dard, Le, 116-122, 125, 126 

Death: significance of, 136-139, 144- 
145; fear of, 144 

Dehumanization, in modern society, 
123-124, 139, 149-150, 163-169 
passim 

Delbos, Victor, 19 

Desacralization, in modern society, 
73-74, 166 

Descartes, René, 14, 16, 86, 165 

Despair vs. hope, 142-144, 150 

Dialogue, 38-41, 169. See also Inter- 
rogation 

Dostoievsky, Feodor, 149 

Dramatic creation: its relation to 
philosophical formulation, 5, 28, 50, 
60-62, 103, 107-108, 113, 115, 117 


176 


Du Bos, Charles, 65, 81 
Du refus a invocation, 126-127 


Ebner, Ferdinand, 38 

Egotism, 102-103, 104-113 passim 

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 158 

Emissaire, L’, 84, 100 

Epictetus, 164 

Equality vs. fraternity, 131-132 

Esslin, Martin, 150 

Ethics, and existential situation, 47- 
48, 63 

Existence: basic ambiguity of, 93; 
and the body, 46-47; vs. objectiv- 
Ity, 47 A 

Existential context (of acts and judg- 
ments), 29, 63-64, 69, 96 

Exploration, 8-9 


Faith: devaluation of, 73; and partici- 
pation, 23, 27. See also Belief 

Fénelon, François de Salignac de la 
Motte, 77 

Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, ror 

Fidelity, 64-69; “creative fidelity,” 66 

Fraternity, 130-135; and freedom, 
147-148; vs. equality, 130-133; VS. 
promiscuity, 158 

Freedom: divine, 29-31; in human 
existence, 87-88, 141, 144-153, 160; 
vs. equality, 131-132; and truth, 
148-150, 166; and grace, 168 

“Fundamental situation,” 12, 83, 100 


Galois, Evariste, 13 

Gide, André, 66, 69, 146 

Gioran, E. M., 159-160 

God: existence of, 27; belief in, 133 
Grace, 107, 167, 168 

Grace, La, 28-30 

Guilty conscience, 119, 120ff., 124 


Hamelin, Octave, 14 

Harvard University, 1, 3 

Having, 96-103 passim, vs. being, 45- 
46, 97-98, 99 

Hegel, G. W. S., 13, 16, 22, 96, 101, 
165; Hegelianism, 151 

Heidegger, Martin, 4, 44, 76, 145 

Hering, Jean, 139 

Hitler, Adolf, 114, 116 

Hocking, Ernest, 1 


Index 


Hoffding, Harald, 25-26 

Homme de Dieu, Un, 62, 107, 108- 
III, 113, 115 

Hommes contre humain, Les, 116 

Homo Viator, 15, 85, 88, 102, 143 

Hope, 141-144; and freedom, 146-148 
passim 

Human dignity: nature of, 94-96, 
116-123 passim, 128-135; modern 
threats to, 123-124, 149-150, 158- 
169 passim 

Hungarian Revolution, 148-149 


Iconoclaste, L’, 48, 50-53, 138 

Idealism (philosophical), 29-30, 78- 
79; vs. faith, 34; and ethics, 47-48; 
and the self, 96, 101. See also Ab- 
straction 

Tlumination, 86-87, 88-89; and hu- 
man dignity, 95-96 

Incarnation, 97, 101 

Individual, the: priority of, 133-135, 
136; modern threats to, 123-124, 
139, 149-150, 162-169 passim 

Insight (Syneidesis), 75, 79-80 

Integrity, 162 

Interrogation, as a method, 6-7, 12- 
13, 37-38. See also Dialogue 

“Intersubjectivity,” 34, 40-41, 103ff., 
147 

Intuition, 35, 75 


James, Henry, 96 
James, William, 1, 2 
Jaspers, Karl, 4, 83 


Kant, Immanuel, 16, 26, 78, 126, 128, 
129, 159 

Kierkegaard, Sören, 23, 25-26 

Kihnelt-Leddihn, Erik Maria von, 
131 


Lagneau, Jules, 27 

Lavelle, Louis, 23, 77 

Lévinas, Emmanuel, 130 

Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, 13 

Liberty. See Freedom 

Love: positive value of, 27, 79, 84, 
107, 144; devaluation of, 73, 123; 
vs. isolation, 33; and commitment, 
73-74 

Lucanus, 143 


Index 


Maimonides, 27 

Malebranche, Nicolas, 87 

Mallarmé, Stéphane, 137 

Marcel, Gabriel: family, 19, 20, 23- 
25; early attitudes and experiences, 
13, 16-31 passim; first writings, 22, 
26-27, 28-34; conversion to Ca- 
tholicism, 64-65, 113; and World 
War I, 35-37, 54-553 and the 1930's, 
114-116; retrospective statement, 
154-157, 169-170 

Maritain, Jacques, 80, 81 

Marx, Karl, 96, 124, 163 

Marxism, and Marxists, 123, 145, 150, 
151, 163 

Mass society, 123-124, 158-169 passim 

Mauriac, François, 64 

Meredith, George, 102, 103 

Metaphysical disquiet, 15, 16-17 

Metaphysical Journal, 1, 15, 35-48 
passim, 82, 96-97 

Moi. See Self 

Monde Cassé, Le, 90-93, 126 

Mort de demain, Le, 62 

Music, meanings of, 21, 26, 50, 78, 
125, 170 

Mystère de l'Etre, Le, 3 

Mystery: positive value of, 52-53, 
127; ontological, 80, 81-83, 85-89 
passim, 92-93; vs. problem, 79-80, 
81-87 passim; and human dignity, 
128 


Nietzsche, Friedrich, 64, 134 


Ontological weight (of human ex- 
perience), 74-75, 79 passim; loss of, 
163-164; and love, 79 


Palais de sable, Le, 31-34 

Parapsychological phenomena, 42- 
43; 51, 53, 140-141 

Participation, 23, 26ff., 77 

Pascal, Blaise, 11, 13, 94 

Perry, Ralph Barton, 47 

Phénoménologie de PAvoir, 98 

Philosopher: vocation of, 3, 9-13, 
156; role of, in modern society, 
167-169 

Philosophical systems and systemati- 
zation, 13-15, 23 


177 


Philosophy: American, 1-2; French, 
19; German and post-Kantian, 2, 
13, 19-22 passim, 26; and life, 13- 
15. See also Abstraction, Idealism, 
Rationalism 

“Piéce a thése,” 61 

Plato, 16, 111, 165 

Politics: French, 19, 114, 116; vs. 

ersonal relations, 116-122 

Popular Front (French), 114, 116 

Positions et approches concrètes, 126, 
142 

Possession, 45, 97-98, 103; vs. free- 
dom, 159-160. See also Having 

Presence, 66-68 

Proust, Marcel, 70 


Quatuor en fa diéze, Le, 48-50, 92 


Rationalism: vs. belief, 72-73; and 
human dignity, 128, 129-130. See 
also Abstraction, Idealism, Philos- 
ophy 

Receptivity, 8-9; “creative receptiv- 
ity,” 126-127 

Recollection, 86, 88-89, 94, 95 

Regard neuf, Le, 62 

Religion: primacy of, 25-26, and 
modern society, 166-167. See also 
Belief 

Research: philosophical, 5-9 passim, 
12-15, 17; technical, 7 

Risk, necessity of, 74 

Rolland, Romain, 36 

Romanticists, 101 

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 146 

Roussin, André, 156 

Royce, Josiah, 1, 68 


Sacred, the: disappearance of, 73-74; 
need for, 128, 130, 166-167 

Sartre, Jean-Paul, 63, 64, 96, 106, 141, 
145, 146 

Scheler, Max, 4, 132 

Schelling, F. W. J. von, 13, 81, 145 

Search: various kinds of, 5-8; and 
the self, 109-113 passim 

Self (moi), 101-103, 104-113 passim; 
image of, in modern society, 165; 
and transcendence, 125-126 

Self-consciousness, 34, 101-102 


178 


Self-deception (“bad faith”), 106 
Seneca, 164 

Sensation, 43-45, 46 

Sincerity, 69-71 

Solitude, need for, 157-158 
Spinoza, Baruch, 14, 142 

Stoicism, 143, 164 

Stern, Gunther, 97, 161 

Suffering, 107 

Survival after death, 52-53, 138-141 


Tabula rasa, 14 

Technicalization. See Technology 

Technocracy, 123, 124, 158-169 pas- 
sim 

Technology, in modern society, 53, 
159-169 passim 

Telepathy, 41-42. See also Parapsy- 
chological phenomena 


Index 


Theater: existential, 111; significance 
of, 21; function of, 107-108. See 
also Dramatic creation 

Thoreau, Henry David, 158 

“Thou,” 39-40, 67, 130 

Thou and 1. See Buber 

“Togetherness,” 41 

Transcendence, 16, 20, 26, 27; art 
and, 16, 125-126. See also Uni- 
versality 


Universal Self (concept of), 101 
Universality, 26, 120, 125-126 


Weil, Simone, 161 

Wonderment (thaumazein), 11-13 
World War I, 35-37, 54-60, 104 
World War II, 63, 116, 117, 141 


