ACPL ITEM (ee 
DISCARDED 


110 M33m 
Marcel 1303034 | 


Metaphysical journal 
ANNEX 


PUBLIC LIBRARY 


FORT WAYNE AND ALLEN COUNTY, IND. 


MOVE 


CARDS FROM POCKET 


a 
fw 


DO NOT Ri: 


tS 


ACPL ITEM 


of 
DISCARDED 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Jean Marie Marcel] 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Metaphysical 


Journal 


Translated by Bernard Wall 


ROCKILIFF 


SALISBURY SQUARE 
LONDON 


FIRST PUBLISHED BY LIBRAIRIE GALLIMARD 
PARIS, 1927 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY 
BERNARD WALL 
AND PUBLISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
THE ROCKLIFF PUBLISHING CORPORATION LTD. 


COPYRIGHT 1952 


MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
Cc. TINLING AND COMPANY LIMITED, LIVERPOOL, 
LONDON AND PRESCOT 


1303034 


a 
=~ HoAN SE ALORS NOTE 


THE Metaphysical Journal of Gabriel Marcel is not an easy 
book to translate into English and not an easy book in itself. 
The English reader must prepare himself for some formidably 
abstract thinking, especially in the first half of Part I, where the 
author is concerned with straightening out his judgment on 
Idealism. 

The translator wishes to express his gratitude for advice on 
various points to M. Marcel himself, to Professor D. M. Mac- 
kinnon and to Mr. Montgomery Belgion. He has been able 
to avail himself of many of their helpful suggestions. 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 
GOeLHESENCLISH. EDITION 


| WOULD like to try to say here what the Metaphysical 
Journal represents for me, considered in the light of my sub- 
sequent writings. 

Jean Hyppolite, author of one of the best contemporary books 
on Hegel, is of the opinion that all that I have written since is in 
fact contained in the Journal. I myself am unable to endorse his 
opinion as it stands. I would even go so far as to say that as I 
see things in the perspective of my philosophical thought, this 
opinion is inadmissible; for it presupposes that since that time 
I have done no more than develop the views expounded in the 
Journal. But we must be careful about that word ‘develop’. It can 
only indicate the analytical process by which thought is limited to 
disentangling the implications contained in ideas stated at the 
outset. But in fact I think I can affirm that my thought has never 
proceeded in this way. And, moreover, it certainly cannot be 
said that the Metaphysical Journal ended by stating ideas from 
which such a development would have been possible. 

It is true that while I was keeping my Journal I had no idea 
that one day it would be published as it stood. I thought of it 
as a preparation for what would one day be a systematic ex- 
position. But subsequent events made that seem an optical 
illusion. For towards 1923, or at a slightly later date, I became 
aware that I would be being unfaithful to myself if I tried to set 
out in a systematic form what had occurred to me in quite a 
different way. Hence—this by way of parenthesis—the feeling 
of anguish that I experienced much later when, in 1948, I was 
invited by the University of Aberdeen to give the Gifford Lec- 
tures. For I wondered whether I would not be guilty of a kind of 


VII 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


intellectual treason if I adopted a’ mode of exposition which did 
not correspond with the true nature of my thought. Moreover, 
in the lectures themselves, though I tried to bring to light the 
fundamental connections between different aspects of my thought, 
I took care to avoid giving my thought anything resembling a 
systematic form. The term ‘concrete approaches’ that I made use 
of to describe the meditations on the mystery of being that I 
originally published immediately after Le Monde Cassé in 1933, 
remains applicable both to the Gifford Lectures and to the Meza- 
physical Journal. It may well be useful to be a little more exact 
about how that expression should be understood. 

It seems to me best to proceed negatively and to bring out 
what is excluded by deliberate recourse to a method of “concrete 
approaches’. Obviously we exclude establishing ourselves on a 
fundamental certainty that could serve as point of departure either 
for a deduction of the Spinozist type, or for a dialectic like that 
of Fichte or Hegel. In philosophies of that kind the notion of 
‘approaches’ is bound to be meaningless. But it should be noted 
that the same holds for pure empiricism—so much so that nothing 
of the sort can exist; for pure empiricism excludes any idea of 
direction; under pain of giving the lie to its definition, it can 
only drift. To be able to speak legitimately of “concrete approaches’ 
there must at least be a presentiment or ‘forefeeling’ of something 
regarding which we can say: “This is reality”. But such a way of 
expressing ourselves still remains unsatisfactory. For to say “This 
is reality” is to indicate something; the designation can only bear 
on objects. Now the central theme of the Metaphysical Journal 
and, of course, of subsequent works, is precisely the impossibility 
of thinking of being as object. This criticism of objectivisation, 
made also by Berdiaev in a parallel way in his principal writings, 
is, if I may so express myself, the backbone of the Metaphysical 
Journal. Being can not be indicated, it cannot be shown; it can 
only be alluded to, a little as some third person now disappeared 
is alluded to amongst friends who knew him formerly and kee 
his memory green. The comparison is acceptable only if the 
evocation does not convert the being who has disappeared into 
an object about which we are discursive and ratiocinative. The 
being in question, who has become active subject, must magnetise 
a certain silence charged with memory and affectivity. 


VIII 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


But we see clearly how inadequate our current language is for 
translating an experience of this type. In itself it tends to ‘objec- 
tivise’ ana when it attempts to transcend objectivity it seems to 
be pulling itself up. The undeniable difficulty of a book such as 
the Metaphysical Journal (I could say the same of Heidegger’s 
Sein und Zeit) comes precisely from this. Heidegger thought it 
_ necessary to create an almost entirely new terminology. I have 
adopted a different course. I must confess that I have never been 
fond of neologisms in metaphysics. They always seem to me 
barbarous; and perhaps it would be worth asking why, though 
until to-day I have never put the question to myself. May we not 
say that the mode of current expression, by the very fact that it 
has served for a multitude of different cases, has become charged 
with a genuine potential that neologisms lack? I am using the word 
‘barbarous’ as meaning ‘strange’ in the absolute sense of the word. 
The mind, that is to say, does not feel that it is “at home”; it feels 
that it is “nowhere”, as in certain modern edifices that lack a past 
and a style. 

Yet here we must point out a difficulty. The potential in 
question carries with it a sort of negative counterpart. The word 
that has been overused has for that reason often lost its value; 
it is devalued as money is devalued. So we have to revalue it. 
I have always been deeply concerned about revaluing words, 
though I would hardly go so far as to affirm that I always had 
this in mind when writing the Metaphysical Journal. What can be 
stated, I think, is that my concern is closely bound up with the 
method of ‘concrete approaches’ considered in itself. Here again 
negative thought allows a glimpse of what cannot be grasped 
directly. 

On many occasions I have denounced the fatal consequences 
of the spirit of abstraction, notably in politics, and have tried to 
show that that spirit leads to fanaticism, in other words, to 
idolatry, and that such idolatry is invariably accompanied by a 
paroxysm of objectivisation (this applies equally to Marxist 
materialism and Nazi racism). But it is manifest that when I set 
about revaluing words, that is, set about rediscovering their 
original and concrete meaning, my thought is proceeding in pre- 
cisely the opposite direction. Hence to-day I am inclined to accept 
Heidegger’s formula to the effect that language is the domicile 


Ae IX 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


(das Haus) of being—Rilke’s Duino Elegies throw light on this 
formula. 

At the time I was writing the Journal I do not know what I 
would have thought of that formula. I suppose it would have 
made me uneasy. Yet perhaps the intuition that it expresses 
already dominated my thought, though I must specify, as I did 
. in Ezre et Avoir, that intuition in an existential philosophy such 
as this is not something that lies at our disposal, something we 
have, but rather it is a source, in itself inaccessible, from which 
we set out to think. It is what I have called a blinded intuition; 
moreover, it is also a ‘forefeeling’ or premonition, and without it 
as I shall recall further on, there cannot be ‘concrete approaches’. 

The metaphysical difficulties raised by this position must not 
be underestimated, and I do not think I have to reproach myself 
with having ignored them. In fact it seems that, wherever we are 
concerned with being in the strict sense, human thought can only 
be vacillating; that is to say, affirmation has not at its disposal 
that ‘grip’ that the object as such assures it. Instead what happens 
makes it seem as though the affirmation had to be inverted on to 
its own non-formal conditions of possibility. In the field of 
objectivity I always limit myself to ratifying or to putting an 
official seal on relations which are proposed to me; that is to say, 
I behave as if I have something in front of me. But as F. Alquié 
has admirably shown in his remarkable book La Nostalgie de 
l’Etre, the aim of being, the ontological aim as such, cannot fail 
to pass beyond the point of opposition between me and what - 
confronts me. ‘This, moreover, is the central point of the opposi- 
tion between problem and mystery as | stated it in Etre et Avoir. 
Though this does not figure terminologically in the Metaphysical 
Journal, | am sure | am not deceiving myself when I say that it is 
no more than the formulation of a distinction that is necessary to 
make the Journal intelligible. For what is the unverifiable, of 
which so much is said in the first part of the Journal, if not mystery 
itself? This may be the proper place to make yet a further remark. 
To-day I would no longer admit that being should be given a 
place beyond truth, as I tended to do at the time when I wrote the 
first part of the Journal. That formula now appears to me either 
as meaningless or else (if interpreted in a Nietzschean way) as 
extremely dangerous. As I wrote in Homo Viator, I consider it 


x 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


indispensable to distinguish carefully between a particular truth 
that is inevitably presented to us as susceptible of being acquired 
and transmitted, and hence can in some degree be compared to a 
having—and truth taken in itself which, as such, can in no 
way be shought (or degraded) in that way. And in the measure 
precisely in which truth cannot be possessed, in which no one 
can claim to be the repository of it, it tends, negatively, to be 
confounded with being. Truth is and can only be, mind. But the 
meaning of that formula can only be revealed indirectly or nega- 
tively. The fanatic, for instance, whatever his fanaticism, is like a 
troglodyte who has dug a home for himself into which mind is 
unable to penetrate. And that is all the more true in the measure 
in which the fanatic claims to be inspired by what he calls a prin- 
ciple or a truth. The idolatrous one-track mindedness whose 
champion he becomes turns into a screen between him and the 
innumerable appeals that mount up from reality to the man who 
has kept his power of reception whole. It is not enough to say 
that such power is systematically held suspect by the fanatic; he 
is muzzled once and for all, and as a result he is atrophied to the 
point of non-entity. 

But it is only proper to add that docility to the solicitations 
of the real may itself have a deforming character if it is not com- 
pensated by that courage of mind that is necessary if consciousness 
is to avoid being wasted in superficial and sterile dilettantism. 
And before all else we must elucidate the nature of such courage. 
The truth is that it is bound up with value, that it is, so to speak, 
the active and concrete safeguard of value—in contrast with ex- 
haustion in all its forms. Value, moreover, is polymorphous 
because it can be presented as truth or as justice, and it concerns 
different aspects for the artist as for the believer. I have some- 
times asked myself in the course of the last years whether the 
use of the term value was in last analysis quite satisfactory and 
whether it did not correspond to an effort to transpose—into the 
domain of spiritual realities—a notion that only fully exhausts 
its significance in the economic order. The sophisms of which 
Sartre has been guilty have helped to throw light on the dangers 
we are exposed to when we make an uncontrolled use of the idea 
of value: I am alluding to the entirely false thesis that man chooses 
his own values. But by this route we are led back to the idea of an 


XI 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


ontological participation that takes the mind beyond the oppo- 
sition that Sartre erects between being in itself (P’étre en sot) and 
being for itself (l’étre pour soi). Meditations on the implications of 
the word ‘with’ and on metaphysical fruitfulness must in my 
opinion be counted among the most valuable contributions of 
the Metaphysical Journal. Later, in the collected writings pub- 
lished under the title Du Refus a I’Invocation, 1 was to submit 
to similar analyses the relations, or rather the super-relations, 
implied by the French word ‘chez’. Here, unless I am mistaken, 
I made use of the word super-relation for the first time. The 
vigorous criticism made by F. H. Bradley (in Appearance and 
Reality) of the current notion of relation—considered as pure 
makeshift—is there extended, and I think I will never be able to 
recognise too explicitly what I owe to that great thinker. In my 
eyes his mistake may well have been—that, at least, is what I 
suggested in my Gifford Lectures—that of remaining too faithful. 
to the traditional notion of totality and of the possible inclusion of 
appearances in the whole. For my part I have tried deliberately 
to do without the, to me, fallacious props that these notions—in 
reality inapplicable to the domain of the mind—have the appear- 
ance of furnishing to the metaphysician. But it is evident that in 
that way I automatically renounce setting up what until now has 
been called a system; for no systematisation is possible without 
constant recourse to the notion of totality. From this standpoint 
it can clearly be understood why the Journal and its dependent 
writings on the one hand, and drama on the other, were my 
favourite and even rather exclusive modes of expression. And 
this motive explains why researches which I originally thought of 
as preparatory work should in the end come to stand by them- 
selves. Doubtless those who have tried to expound my thought 
have often yielded to the temptation of systematising it, and in the 
Gifford Lectures I too may have succumbed up to a point to that 
temptation. What matters, above all, in an exposé of this sort, 
is that it should be carried on in such a way as to provide an 
irresistible invitation to the reader or the listener to break out of 
his strait-jacket and plunge directly into that current of personal 
and passionate research which is the very heart of my thought 
in its original impulse. 

One of my pupils once asked me whether my philosophy 

XII 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 


could not be considered to be a kind of neo-Socratism. The ex- 
pression struck me very much, and on reflection I wonder whether 
the description would not be the least inexact that could be 
applied to me. The term existentialism brought with it the worst 
of misunderstandings and I now consider I have repudiated it 
once and for all. I pointed this out in Milan several months ago— 
and it was in Italy that the label of ‘Christian existentialist’ was 
first attached to me. . 

What the term neo-Socratism implies is above all the—in no 
way sceptical—attitude of interrogation that is a constant with me, 
and appears perhaps even more clearly in my stage plays. It. 
also and co-relatively implies an emphasis on communication as 
realised by dialogue, by addressing oneself to a Thou and count- 
ing on him and thus giving him credit. It implies, finally, the 
adoption of a negative attitude to the results we can hope to 
reach through any kind of physics because physics can never 
escape from the objective categories. Viewed in this perspective 
my thought should appear as the prolongation of a fundamentally 
anti-dogmatic tradition; and if it is linked up with Bergson that is 
in the measure in which Bergson himself gave us the means for 
proceeding beyond him when in his last work he made use of the 
category of the ‘open’ (which is also to be found, though ad- 
mittedly in a very different way, at the end of the Duino Elegies). 
I do not think I am deceiving myself when I say that though I did 
not realise this in the beginning, my researches have bearing on 
all the conditions that permit us to maintain thought in the state of 
‘openness’, in contradistinction to a systematised dogmatics 
closed in on itself. It is in this sense, it seems to me, and in this 
spirit, that the reader should approach this difficult and, in places, 
disconcerting book that is now presented to the English speaking 
public. 


— 


Autumn, 1950 GaBRIEL MarceEn 


XIII 


% 
= ; 
» i 
4 
7" 
. ‘ 
oa a > ‘ 
‘ 
s ‘ 
= } 
~~ 
~ 
~ 


= 
> 
* 
4 
a . = 
. —— = 
i 
<——e 
~ 
7 . 
] cant 
= 
4 i " iT 
= i ‘ i we = ¥ Py 
7 é 1 iaaliiene! tat 
Sy eS ’ : 24 Si 
‘ — oft, Se ae 
¥ : a 
, a " Pr: 
\ ns oy 
¢ 
i“ ~ 
Me ie ’ as 
Hi 
» Sn : 
1 ial Ei rs 
4. 
* > 
: 4 
pe 
. 
- ~~ ie 
<a 
i 
j 
: ‘ 
P ™ 
‘ig j 
7i* y 
ab J 
ei aS 
Re ¥ ‘i ~ * 
t 
* 1@ - 


COONTISELNeLiS 


Translator’s Note 


page v 


AUTHOR’S PREFACE 
to the English Edition 
page vii 


PART I 
page 1 
PART tf 
page 129 
APPENDIX 
Page 32) 


INDEX 
page 341 


PART I 


METAPHYSICAL 
JOURNAL 


January st, 1914 
O* ONE plane the world is not only devoid of all meaning, 


but even to raise the question of whether there is a meaning 
is a contradiction. This plane is that of immediate existence. It is 
of necessity the plane of the fortuitous, of the order of chance. 

By reflection we can raise ourselves to successive planes on 
which things become intelligible. The question I have set myself 
is whether it is possible to establish the existence of ontological 
differences between such planes. The orders are really differ- 
entiated by their respective potentials of intelligibility, that is to 
say they are unequally explanatory. From the standpoint of 
immediate existence nothing can be explained or even understood. 
Empiricism, in that it is a philosophy of the immediate, is self- 
destructive. The immediate is the very reverse of the principle of 
intelligibility. 

From the standpoint of the higher planes the immediate must 
no longer be defined as a datum but as infinitely mediable. This 
does not mean that it ceases to be a datum, but that the category 
of datum is not here the essential thing. The relation of the 
Gegebensein on which in the beginning all, it was claimed, could 
be built, is shown to be entirely devoid of intrinsic significance, in 
the sense that it implies an empirical subject who himself enfolds 
an infinite. This relation is presented at the outset as immediate 
and absolute only because immediate consciousness sets aside the 
determinations that qualify it as subject. Whereas, in so far as 
immediate consciousness becomes self-aware as a definite em- 
pirical subject, it is constituted as pure reflection. (I am tempted to 
express this by saying that a mind is only really what it itself makes 


I 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


itself.) The act by which reflection is defined as such (for the 
philosopher, i.e. for the vonotg vorxcews) is the act by which 
consciousness thinks itself as empirical. 


January 5th 


I am of the firm belief, and my conviction is not of recent date, 
that philosophical truthsare relative to the requirements (exigences)* 
of the thoughts that constitute them. The hierarchy of truths 
is defined in function of the hierarchy of the requirements. 
The only problem lies in finding out in relation to what these 
hierarchical planes of thoughts are ordered. Thinkers like Leibnitz 
or Hegel believed that they were ordered in relation to an absolute 
plane which was the plane of being itself—the plane on which 
reality is what it is, the plane on which God sees reality. (Here, as 
we can immediately see, the question of divine transcendence has 
no bearing.) This way of thinking is involved (in the most con- 
fused and implicit way) in every affirmation that starts out from 
the postulate that philosophy has an exterior object whose faithful 
reproduction it tends more and more to become; thus with anyone * 
who thinks he is in a position to talk of the truth or falsity of a 
system. But in my opinion this hierarchy neither should nor can 
be defined in function of an ontological order posited in an 
idealist way. The criticism of absolute knowledge ends in a con- 
demnation of this way of looking at things. So the problem I 
am induced to raise amounts to asking how the hierarchy can be 
thought of independently of this idea. 


January 7th 


The problems by which I am preoccupied at present are for the 
most part problems of method. Here are the main ones. First of all 
there is the problem of founding the hierarchy of philosophical 
thought while avoiding both realism and pure subjectivism (which 
is, moreover, contradictory; to posit systems as subjective inter- 
pretations is to consider them as relative to an entirely objective 
order that is relegated to the domain of the unknowable). Then I 
would like to define my attitude to the philosophy of history in 
relation to Hegel’s. The Hegelian paradox lies in the idea that the 


1 Exigences. There is no completely satisfactory translation of this word. The German 
word would be Forderung. 


2 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


— * 


systems illustrate the dialectic even before begetting it, that the 
mind only exists on conditions that it creates itself, that the 
Firsichsein supposes the Ansichsein; in other words that the 
moments of the dialectic have to begin by being posited as abso- 
_lutes (the positing of the moments as absolutes is itself a moment 
that necessarily precedes the positing of the momentsas moments). 
Jam not satisfied with this dialectical realism. But why not? Is it 
because I have not freed myself sufficiently from the realism of 
time which, so to speak, hypostatises the before and the after?>—I 
am led to raise the obscure and badly defined problem of the reality 
of time. Yesterday I was wondering (perhaps some light will 
finally emerge from all these problems) whether we know exactly 
what we mean when we posit a problem of the a priori. In what 
sense is it true or false to say of an idea that it is a priori? Does not 
the question go completely beyond the system.in which such 
categories have a meaning? Is not its significance restricted to 
that lower stage on which what is innate and what is acquired are 
conceived in some physiological way? Here we have an important 
problem which no one, I think, has noticed. I also asked myself 
whether there might not be a way of defining the conditions under 
which the reflection of a thought upon itself could be creative 
(and not be a mere reproduction or sterile double). But I still 
see no solution. 

To return to the problem of time. Ought we not to distin- 
guish two planes (I still see this very confusedly) according as to 
whether the mind is aware or not aware of the relativity of the 
before and the after? I will go into this later. 


January 8th 


There is an immanent connection between the reality of God and 
the realisation of God by the saint. But to the saint the reality 
of God can only appear as that in which he (the saint) participates 
—there would be no truth in a statement that claimed to trans- 
cend the need to posit participation. On the other hand we should 
notice that the saint’s realisation of God is not a matter of his- 
torical immediacy, susceptible of being somehow a datum for 
further consciousnesses; it can only be re-thought and re-con- 
structed. In this way the historical uncertainty which must needs 
have weight in the life of a saint is justified in reason; sanctity, 


3 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


which is itself constructed, has to serve as foundation for further 
constructions, etc. These further constructions will not be false, 
for it is not the historical material that matters in the life of a saint, 
or rather it is arbitrary to dissociate such material from the 
religious content. And the dissociation is only possible for the 
unbeliever. The unbeliever who claims to make a historical re- 
construction goes beyond the frontiers of all that which is. 
Analysis, here, can only be brought to bear on the void and can 
only discover the void. 


January 9th 


I seem to see clearly how the idea of divine creation is justified 
(faith in God as creator). From the standpoint of science I see 
myself as conditioned causally in an infinite degree by the 
biological development that preceded me, and this seems to 
pulverise my reality. But can I conceive this truth regarding 
myself (it is anyway unthinkable) as final? I could only do so if 
I made this truth real by an arbitrary act. Notice that were I to 
accept this infinite determinism I would necessarily reach the 
point of positing a radical dualism between what I am in so far as 
I am thought (which seeks being and the good)—and the purely 
contingent matter that makes up my empirical self. If I affirmed 
this dualism seriously I would be destroying all action or rather 
would be rendering it impossible. Only in so far as I deny this 
dualism can I act; action itself is the negation of it. But what do 
I discover if I reflect on what the negation of this dualism re- 
quires? I discover that I must posit that the relation between 
myself, inasmuch as I am thought and will, and my empirical self, 
is not a contingent relation. It is beyond knowing that I must think 
the unity of this dualism. 

The unity can only be thought outside time. I must refuse 
to think myself as contingent (that is, as determined in infinite 
degree). This means that I must think myself as willed by a non- 
temporal act which is bound up with me without any inter- 
mediary. And from the thought of the God who willed me and 
in virtue of the immanent connection that unites me with the 
world and makes-me exist, I must pass on to the thought of the 
God who willed the world. 

This could be systematised if we thought of God predeter- 


4 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


mining the series of causes at the beginning of time, but in that 
way we would be setting aside the essential element of the de- 
monstration. 

(This leads me to a reflection on method. I can ask myself 
about the conditions under which I can think myself as created. 
But that method is no more than heuristic because that whose 

conditions I am seeking can still be thought to be a pure and 
gratuitous hypothesis. Whereas if, later on, the conditions come 
to seem real to me and as of necessity involving faith in a creating 
God, then I shall have achieved the real demonstration.) 

This is bound up with the problem of time in the form 
in which I have already raised it, and leads, I believe to the 
solution. 

First of all we must posit in principle that the real consump- 
tion of time is bound up with the existence of a world in becoming, 
that is, of a world subject to causality. I believe that causes are 
abstractions and that in this sense causality itself is no more than 
a purely artificial rationalisation of a totality of becoming; but 
that does not matter here. If such be the case it is only if the mind 
can transcend the order of causality itself that we can conceive 
the ideality of time. But on what conditions could such ideality 
‘be thought as truth? In other words, do the conditions under 
which a notion can be thought as truth apply to the ideality of 

time? For that to be so it would not only be necessary that em- 
pirical thought should be capable of elevation to a viewpoint at 
which it would appear to itself as appearance (in so far as it was 
bound up with a world in becoming) but also that this viewpoint 
and order should have characteristics which in a general way 
define a truth. 


January 12th 


This morning I was wondering whether, if faith cannot be 
identified with a judgment of existence, it would be possible, 
inversely, to see faith in the judgment of existence; that is, to 
justify in function of religious thought the irreducible character 
of the judgment of existence—that pure immediacy which or- 
dinary thinking has set aside (since it converts the judgment of 
existence into a confusedly stated judgment of relation). That 


remains to be seen. Along that way the theory of participation 
y 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


would lead to a new metaphysic based on religion. But obviously 
such an idea is dangerous. 


January 13th 
Regarding the ideality of time the first problem we should have 
raised is about the conditions which alone can make it thinkable. 

In my opinion the reasons in favour of ideality are not those 
given by Kant. We can only deduce transcendent ideality from 
empirical reality if we posit implicitly a relation of experience to 
reality which may well be unacceptable. The process of argument 
supposes that the idea of the thing-in-itself acts as a substratum 
of experience, and, as is well known, this idea is difficult to admit. 
As I see things, the ideality of time can only be demonstrated with 
the help of an internal criticism whose object is to make explicit 
the contradictions immanent in the idea of time. In this sense one 
should see in the Antinomies the true and only demonstration 
that Kant has made (although he thought he had done it in his 
Aesthetic). I leave aside the question of continuity and restrict 
myself to taking up once more the principal difficulties inherent 
in the idea of time (as regards the problem of a beginning). When 
we posit a beginning to time we are in reality thinking nothing at 
all. For a “before”? remains conceivable and even of necessity 
has to be conceived. We are exclusively positing a beginning of 
what is in time. Is this a real or merely a verbal solution? It could 
be said: time itself as ideal form has no beginning, but that which 
is in time may have one. : 

But this is either straightway unintelligible, or else comes back 
to thinking a relation between what is outside time and what 
is in time; and this relation is unthinkable (unless we surrepti- 
tiously convert what is outside time into temporal reality). The 
solution is thus purely verbal. Moreover, can time be really 
thought of as purely ideal? As the duration of nothing kept in 
duration by nothing? 


January 14th 
On the other hand, to think of time without a beginning is also 


1 Perhaps the first question we should ask is whether the mind can reach certainty on this 
point, or whether such a solution is not a figment and really boils down to imagining 
a historical fact (i.e. that can be regarded by the mind as contingent, as not bound up 
with the act by which it defines and thinks itself). ; 


6 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


impossible, for the reason given by Kant. Moreover, it is no real 
solution, it is an answer that only puts off the answer indefinitely. 
And so we are forced to admit that the problem is insoluble. 
Why? Not for a reason of fact, but only because thought has no 
right to realise time, to treat it as an object about which one can 
reason. Time is a formal condition under which objects can be 
presented to us, it is not itself an object. The problem is insoluble 
_ because it is not a legitimate one. How can we get from here to 
the idea of time as mere phenomenon? « 

It seems to me that the transition can be made as follows. 
There is a solidarity between time and temporal reality. To 
prohibit ourselves from raising the question of the origin of 
time means to prohibit ourselves from raising the question of 
the origin of the world (inasmuch as it is bound up with time and 
is its real aspect). But if it is equally absurd to affirm or to deny 
that the world had a beginning, this is because the world (as such) 
is not in being, because the world is pure appearance. And from 
the ideality of the world (inasmuch as temporal) we deduce the 
ideality of its form, which is time. In other words I believe that we 
cannot directly infer the phenomenal character of time from its 
formal character, and that, as intermediary, we must have re- 
course to the idea of the solidarity of time with what exists in 
time. But the (negative) answer which is clear as regards time, 
is very obscure as regards what exists in time. It seems unthinkabl 
that both alternatives regarding the world can be f 
the only way of avoiding the contradiction a 
saying that the true world is outside time;-<i 
dictions we have to face are bound up with t 
of time as a form with a reality which is itself (in itself) non- 
temporal. The subjectivity of time will serve as an explanation. 
We can say that it is because of the weakness of our finite con- 
sciousness that we can only grasp reality in a temporal way, and so 
we get involved in the antinomies already mentioned. Such, I 
think, are the principal lines of the process of argument. (It is im- 
portant to see that, even if we admit the Bergsonian theory of time, 
the problem still stands absolutely, and that, even if real time is 
only the duration that gives rhythm to the élan vital, the dilemma 
remains unchanged. For the éan vital began in time; and it does 
not seem to me possible to escape the question of the “before”’.) 


ff 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


What are we to think of the idealist solution so defined? 
Before we tackle it must we not ask ourselves whether a refusal 
to realise the historical “becoming” of the world would provide: 
an escape from it? We have to give up the illusion by which we 
compare the world to a person whose past (so it seems) can be 
completely realised. It can be objected that there is no reason why 
the mode of thinking valid for a part of the world should not be 
equally valid for the world itself. To this we can answer that if it 
is possible for us to ‘“‘realise” a person’s past, that is because in an 
arbitrary way we envisage a discontinuous section of the “be- 
coming”, a section in reality bound up absolutely continuously 
with all the becoming that went before; we realise the past in 
question because we are only considering a fiction. And hence we 
should never view the world’s past under the aspect of datum— 
for under this aspect it is inevitably contradictory and unthink- 
able. We should only regard it as the material of an infinite 
rational development (a development conceived as potential and 
future and hence not contradictory). By the conversion of the 
past into the future we escape the disastrous contradictions of 
thesis and antithesis (obviously the germ of this solution can be 
found in Kant). By viewing the historical past of the world in 
function of the infinite activity of mind which progressively 
extracts its truth, we manage to eliminate the irrational elements 
..,which, it seemed, only the idea of a non-tempora! reality could 

dissipate...Can we accept a solution of this kind, one at once 
“Fdealist-anderitical? Notice that we have been speaking of the 

felopmen: rywcueht which progressively constitutes a truth. 
But a truth can*only be constituted in co-relation with an intui- 
tion (at least as ideally reproduced). If it is abstracted from in- 
tuition the thought by which truth is defined is stated to be 
incapable of verification. So the solution is shown to be vain. 
There seems to be only one way of escaping from this difficulty. 
It consists in saying that the thought in question has bearing 
on laws and not on past facts. But here we have two alternatives: 
either such laws are posited to be outside time (interpreted in a 
Platonic sense) and in that case we cannot evade positing the 
non-temporal, or else they are thought of as immanent conditions of 
the empirical, and then they are not dissociable from the world as 
subjected to time. And so we fall back into our earlier difficulties. 


8 


waa a 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Hence it looks as though we cannot escape from the dilemma 
of, on the one hand, a reality involved in time, and on the other 
of a non-temporal reality (in which the order of becoming seems 
to be mere appearance). What about the second alternative? It 
forces us to raise the general problem of the relationships between 
appearance and reality. Do we really eliminate the contradictions 
_inherent in time by conceiving a non-temporal reality of which 
time is the appearance? It is clear that there is no real meaning in 
positing the objective production of time by the non-temporal. 
We need to have recourse to the roundabout way of subjectivity 
and say that appearance is bound up with the existence of finite 


thought. 


January 15th 


I have shown elsewhere the vanity of the attempt of the Absolute 
Idealists to integrate phenomenal appearances into the absolute 
(whether or not the appearances are conceived in function of 
thought that is tainted with subjectivity). And so if we posit the 
dualism of what is in time and what is outside time, we should 
not do so with the hope that we will, later, be able to unify the 
two orders. The logical faith with which a philosopher such as 
Bradley posits the unity and the transmutation of appearances 
in the heart of the real is only an appeal to the unintelligible. 
To the logical optimism of the neo-Hegelians we need to oppose 
the logical pessimism of a philosopher like Spir who denies both 
the possibility of establishing a co-ordination between the norm 
and the anomaly and the possibility of deducing the anomaly from 
the norm. It seems to me that Spir’s dualism contradicts itself 
in so far as he admits that the action of moral causes “cannot 
cause any derangement in the order of the world, because it is 
exercised in virtue of one of the fundamental cosmic forces.””' But is 
Spir’s ontological dualism tenable? No doubt Spir would not 
like to see his doctrine called an ontological dualism, because for 
him only the norm has an ontological character. “The norm of 
thought,” he says, “‘being the notion of the normal and absolute 
nature of things, is the foundation of all ontology.” He tries to 
demonstrate the objective validity of this norm so as to show 


1 (Nouvelles esquisses de philosophie critique p. 113). 
2 Loc. cit. p. 91. 


9 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


that it must be thought of as being of the very nature of objects. 
It would be useless to go into it here, but when we examine his 
demonstration! we see that the—often very vague—treasons he 
adduces militate, not in favour of his metaphysical realism, but 
in favour of a doctrine of a critical type in which thought is 
conceived as applying certain formal criteria to things, and hence 
in need of rediscovering the tracks of its criteria in objects. I seem 
constantly to see in Spir’s thought a confusion between the object 
of thought (in so far as it is the object of thought) and what could 
be called the absolute object. Doubtless Spir would deny the 
legitimacy of this distinction, but, if he fails to make it, he does 
not even touch the critical problem; and his solution is meaning- 
less because it falls short of the issue. Moreover, if the norm is 
posited as reality, we are obliged, also by means of an act of equa- 
lising, to posit the anomaly itself as reality. Or else, if we do not 
posit the norm to be reality, but only to be appearance, at least 
that appearance must be the appearance of a reality. Now either 
this is meaningless or else we must posit a relation (an incompre- 
hensible one) between norm and anomaly. Were we to admit 
something which was neither reality nor appearance, we would 
merely be playing with words. Can we admit two realities? If we 
posit them as equally real, we destroy the very nerve of the onto- 
logical argument (which consists in the transition from the in- 
telligible to the real) since the irrational also has a reality. 

So the conclusion of this dialectic is that the norm and the 
anomaly should not be posited as realities (neither one nor the other 
nor one and the other); and that the dualism ought not to be and 
cannot be conceived in an ontological sense. And this obtains for 
any conception whatsoever of appearance and reality. The dualism 
can only be thought to be entirely relative to the movement of the 
mind that posits it. Moreover, when we conceive the ontological 
norm, it is only too clear that we profit nothing and, futhermore, 
that we are thinking nothing concrete. 


January 16th 


I return, then, to the problem of the ideality of time. From what I 
have said already it follows that if time can be posited as ideal, 
this is in no way by opposition to a reality not subject to time and 
1 Loc. cit. pp. 85-90. 


IO 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the temporal order of which is subjective appearance. It is in this 
sense only that the problem of reality cannot even be posited as 
regards time. Thought, in its interior progress, is led to ask itself 
certain questions which at first sight seem to have a possible 
bearing on the world and its conditions but which, on analysis, 
are shown not only to be insoluble but even inapplicable on that 


_plane. To posit the ideality of time and of the world in so far as it 


is subject to development in time (this development being the 
real correlative of time) is thus merely to say that: metaphysical 
problems can only be raised in an order abstracted from all relation 
(even a negative relation) to time. We may also ask ourselves 
whether the negative relation, in whatsoever way we conceive it, 
does not also imply a positive (and incomprehensible) relation— 
for my own part I am convinced it does. It seems to me that apart 
from this solution and those we have already set aside there is only 
one further solution that is theoretically possible. Namely, the 
positivist solution which consists in saying that as these questions 
cannot be applied to the world of experience, they ought quite 
simply to be excluded. But that solution is purely verbal. Ques- 
tions regarding the origin of time (and of the world) arise inevit- 
ably and precede all criticism. And the only criticism which can 
demonstrate that they are illegitimate requires a real employment 
of pure thought (which is constituted by this very employ- 
ment) and that transcends all positivism. 

So the progress we are describing is not the synthetic Hegelian 
progress that at one and the same time surpasses the thesis and 
antithesis and unites them in the synthesis; it is the progress of a 
reflection that transcends what it itself has posited. Whereas pro- 
gress as defined in the Hegelian way must needs claim to have an 
ontological significance, but because of this raises the insoluble 
question (which cannot be avoided but only conjured away) of 
the independent reality of the inferior moments—dialectics as | 
conceive them are purely ideal, they bear exclusively on the modes 
of statement, consequently they do not claim to be valid onto- 
logically, and so do not come up against the above difficulty. It 
can be objected that, as there is no integration, the exteriority of 
the successive moments in relationship to one another still subsists. _ 
But I reply first of all that such exteriority always subsists impli- 
citly, and that, moreover, assimilation or real integration is not the 


II 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


aim I am pursuing and there would be no point in achieving it. 

A further objection is that a synthetic dialectic is only valid 
if it is therefore—at least ideally—analytical, that is, if it requires 
its term as its principle; and that is- only possible if its term is 
posited at the outset as absolute synthesis, as totality completely 
realised. But I reply that this only applies to a dialectic that claims 
to reconstruct, and not to the dialectic of a reflection that rises to 
ever higher planes of intelligibility. 

Yet a further difficulty could be raised regarding the relation 
of dialectics to their matter, their object. But such a problem is 
not absent from Hegelianism itself, and moreover it does not seem 
to me to present special difficulties. What is certain is that the 
relation of thought to its object appears differently to thought 
itself following the manner in which thought conceives the object. 
This needs further elucidation. 

There is still one further difficulty, that of understanding the 
relation of the dialectic to time. But that difficulty is strictly non- 
existent because we are not positing the reality of the non- 
temporal but only the transcendence of the real in relation to the 
opposition between the temporal and the intemporal; that is to 
say, “the irrelevancy of time.” 

I note that Spir’s pessimism is defined in relation to the idea 
of a potential resolution! of the dualism and that the resolution 
is posited in an ontological sense. But that is precisely the refuge 
I cannot admit, and for this very reason I am unable to admit 
Spir’s point of view. If there is ground for adopting logical 
optimism this is not, as the neo-Hegelians think, because in the 
absolute all is good and contradictions are reconciled, but because 
thought experiences itself as the potentiality of mediation and 
conciliation. But here we seem to be up against another difficulty. 
Are we not confronted with the idea that reconciliation or media- 
tion is an infinite task, an infinite “So//en’’? And are we not over- 
looking the Hegelian demonstration of the relativity of the point 
of view of the “‘Sollen” (which implies the “bad infinity”)? Before 
going into this question I feel we need to note that there is no 
contesting the fact that all contradictions cannot be thought of 
as being reconciled in the absolute. The contradictions inherent 
in time can only be reconciled by substitution, not by synthesis. 


1 Theoretically, not actually. 


I2 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


But, if we look closer, the neo-Hegelian method will be seen to be 
identical with mine as regards all that is concrete in it. 
: A way that allows us to proceed further is opened up, I think, 
when we ask ourselves what we mean when we question ourselves 
_ about the existence of truth. We can imagine (I do not say think), 
a type of pure and absolute scepticism which denies all truth; but 
_it is plain beyond need of emphasis, that this type of scepticism is 
in every way destructive of itself. I am not saying that a certain 
scepticism may not be legitimate; but it is not the kind that denies 
all truth—the latter kind is in no measure a thought. But then it 
will be enough if we admit that there is an order of the true. What 
do we mean, as regards this order of the true, when we raise the 
question of existence and ask if the true exists? If we are not asking 
whether affirmations exist which can be qualified with the epithet 
true, what are we asking? I take it we are applying to truth the 
requirement of imaginative thought which insists that objects 
should “exist outside ourselves.” Only we should note that this 
requirement as regards objects is itself very ambiguous. Do we 
mean that the objects ought to exist outside our body?—some- 
thing that has ever been contested by the idealists. Do we mean: 
outside thought (representation)? But as imaginative thought 
identifies the thinking subject with the body, I believe that the 
distinction between the two questions has no clear meaning for it. 
Note, moreover, that imaginative thought affirms the identity of 
the real object and the object represented, it would never occur 
to it to affirm that they are dual. Hence I think that the problem 
of the reality of the external world is one that cannot even be 
raised by imaginative thought. If it is so raised it is as regards the 
body, and in that field it is meaningless. And even if it were 
raised on genuine grounds, imaginative thought would clearly 
prefer idealist theory to the admission of a dualism between the 
real and what is represented. Furthermore it would object to 
conceiving this identity (of the real and of what is represented) 
in the interests of what is represented, on the grounds that such 
a solution seems to compromise the reality of the object (its 
independence in relation to its perczpi). 


January 17th 
The solution clearly consists in positing that the object is con- 


13 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


structed as object; that is to say—and by definition—as inde- 
pendent of the perceiving subject. Its construction is not posterior 
to experience, as maintained in a contradictory way by the 
Empiricists, nor anterior to it, but identical and co-extensive 
with it. 

What do we mean by existence when we attribute it to 
an object? 

Until now I have been much tempted to identify existence 
in this connection with the immediate thought apart from which 
we can only establish purely abstract reflection. I have defined it 
as posited (whether ideally or not) in relation to an actual con- 
sciousness, that is, as the link in the heart of an experience to an 
actual content of consciousness. During the summer I wrote: 
“When I say: Caesar has existed—and I take my example from 
the past because it is there that definition seems to be most subject 
to discussion—I do not only mean that Caesar could have been 
perceived by me; I also mean that between the existence of Caesar 
and my state of consciousness, my actual awareness, lies an 
(infinitely complex) series of relations in time which is capable 
of being determined in an objective way. My actual state of con- 
sciousness, which is bound up with the position of the organic 
body that it expresses, is the landmark in relation to which the 
infinite multiplicity of what can be thought by myself as existing 
is ordained. All existence can be traced back to this landmark, 
and outside of all relation to it, it is only by an abstraction that we 
can think existence. To think a thing as existing is to think oneself 
as the perceiver, it is to extend one’s experience in such a way 
that it comprehends even that which it appeared to leave outside 
itself. This does not imply the kind of subjective idealism which 
attributes a privileged value to the immediate data of perception, 
but only the affirmation that existence supposes a relation to an 
immediate thought in general, that is to say, to my thought.” 

Clearly at first sight this does not satisfy the mind. The ideal 
relation in question appears to be only the indication of existence. 
There would thus seem to be a reality of existence of which the 
relation is only the phenomenon. Has this any meaning? We then 
need to distinguish between the content of the notion, the exis- 
tence in itself of this content, and the indication (for us) of this 
existence (the fact that it enfolds a potential relation with an 


14 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


actual consciousness). But what is existence in itself here? If we 
posit its unknowableness, its absolute indeterminability, we are 

clearly saying nothing and even ruling out the notion itself. 
_ Ought we to regard it as a characteristic intrinsic in the notion? 
But that is impossible because the thing can be thought of as 
non-existent. And if it is an external characteristic of the notion 
it comes back to the general relation we have already defined. 
Only a psychological metaphysic could provide a solution by 
saying that existence defined as relation to experience is only the 
indication of the fact which consists in being for itself, in being a 
datum for itself. Thus the existence of other consciousnesses 
could be said to be not exhausted by the fact that these con- 
sciousnesses are data given to an actual consciousness as bodies. 
And in this example, the only one that can be adduced in favour 
of the pan-psychist theory, there is a latent claim to discovering 
the proof of the dualism of existence in itself and of existence for 
us. But the argument is extremely superficial. A consciousness 
only exists for me in the measure in which it is revealed to me ob- 
jectively (that is, through the medium of a body.) I then proceed 
to think of this consciousness as a consciousness by analogy with 
myself. 

Provisionally I will leave this point aside so as to turn back 
to a potential difficulty. Do hallucinations exist? Anyway, they 
do not exist in the same sense asa physical object exists. Three 
solutions are possible. We could say that existence is relationship 
to an immediate consciousness (an individual consciousness, 
since the relation is not capable of being generalised). Or we 
could say there are degrees in existence. Or we could say that 
existence is this relationship, but to an actual consciousness in 
general (which would amount to saying once more that there is 
only existence for what is objective). It seems to me evident that 
we must posit @ priori a plurality of planes of existence each 
defining itself by the system of conditions which govern the ways 
in which one and the same content can be given to the immediate 
consciousness (which is itself defined in function of these planes, 
and hence on planes that are themselves in a hierarchy). I will 


1 (1925). Nowadays I should make the most express reserves about this interpretation. 
But in what sense do I think myself as existing?—there lies the whole question. Here we 
are touching on an essential problem. 


9] 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


return later to the difficulty of understanding what becomes of 
the identity of content. 

But now we come against two fundamental problems. The 
first is to find out in relation to what the hierarchy in question is 
defined, what is its principle. The second regards the nature of the 
identical content which is given as apprehended in different ways 
on the different planes of consciousness. It is-clear, to begin with, 
that if we use the word content in its common meaning, the 
content is not and cannot be identical. So under the distinct 
contents we must subtend a content differentiated from them yet 
conceived as being substantially the same. But then all the difh- 
culties I have already pointed out reappear. Either this content is 
a logical form (the very unity of consciousness) or else it is in- 
determinable, contradictory and fictitious. It might nevertheless 
be claimed that this content may possess determinable and de- 
finite characteristics though they are differentiated according to 
the character of the mode of consciousness which apprehends it 
(this content). Contradictory or not, this interpretation at first 
sight seems natural enough. Can we accept it? It is plain to begin 
with that as regards the problem of existence this interpretation 
in no way modifies the situation we have already noted. For either 
we identify existence with the characteristics which make up this 
content (which means making existence a predicate), or else we 
attribute existence to this content because we posit it as ideally 
given to the consciousness which thinks of itself (in an undeter- 
mined way) as the perceiver. What matters in the foregoing 
process of argument is that it establishes that existence cannot be 
conceived as the substratum common to the different contents 
we apprehend. 

So if we posit a common content, it can only be on condition 
that we do not posit it as existing (in the sense in which preceding 
contents existed) because it can only exist by the same right as 
preceding contents (in virtue of its relation to immediate con- 
sciousness) and it has no ontological privilege in relation to 
them (no pre-eminence from the standpoint of existence). This 
is to say that the content can only be posited as having no relation 
to immediate consciousness, as not being given to it; it can only 
be posited as thought, that is to say as ideal (in opposition to the 
contents of sense—data which were, on the contrary, existent). 


16 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


And so if we adopt the word existence in a univocal sense, we 
must maintain that in so far as sense contents exist, laws do not 
exist (or vice versa). 

From this it follows that the datum should be thought of 
as contingent. For we have already seen that if existence belongs 
to the world of sensation, it cannot be said to belong to the rational 
order. But it follows that the world of sensation cannot be deduced 

from the rational order, for the profound reason that thought, 
inasmuch as it is thought (and non-immediate), is not deduced 
from immediate consciousness. If the order of sense cannot be 
deduced from a rational order we are forced to admit that an 
individual thought must appear to itself as situated in a contin- 
gent whole—because this thought itself can only define itself as 
rational by transcending the whole (which rational thought, far 
from justifying, presupposes). 


January 18th 


I come back to some of the points I touched on yesterday. I feel 
I can now view as established that we can only speak of existence 
with regard to objects given in an immediate relation to a con- 
sciousness (which is at least posited as possible). As we can 
conceive a multiplicity of ways in which one and the same object 
(the same content) might be given to consciousness in an im- 
mediate relation, we must conceive an infinite series of planes of 
existence relating to the possible modes of apprehension. The 
external world (in the usual sense of the word) is posited on a 
special plane of existence which corresponds to the special system 
of conditions which govern human perception, and it is certain 
that in the measure in which, to take a particular example, we 
introduce instruments to modify these conditions of perception 
we in some way violate the unity of this world and introduce a 
principle of equivocation. We have seen, moreover, that the re- 
lation that we must establish between these planes of existence is 
extremely difficult to determine, that the unity that we can sub- 
tend beneath them is not that of a thing existing; that is to say, 
_eyen if it is the unity of an object, this object cannot be thought 
as being in immediate relation to any consciousness whatsoever 
(even potential). If, then, we supposed there to be conscious 
beings differently organised from ourselves and perceiving quali- 


B 17 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


ties that we do not suspect, we ought not therefore to allow 
ourselves to posit a substratum—itself endowed with qualities— 
which, though diversely apprehended by distinct consciousnesses, 
would possess in itself certain determinations. Such a sub- 
stratum cannot be thought of as fundamental reality, as objective 
basis of two distinct systems of perception, unless it is thought of 
as being itself removed from all the conditions of perceptibility 
for any consciousness whatsoever; that is to say, as an intelligible, 
as something can only be thought or constructed but cannot be 
a datum. All the spurious problems that are posited on the rela- 
tion of laws to things (existences) are precisely due to our failure 
to make this capital distinction, to the fact that we refuse to 
situate them both in orders that are irreducibly separate. If, by 
the contingence of one order in relation to another, we understand 
the impossibility of deriving the former from the latter, we must 
in consequence posit the absolute contingence of existences in 
relation to any rational order whatsoever. 

But then, to leave aside the primary problem and to return to 
an earlier question, we have to ask ourselves in what sense a con- 
sciousness can be thought of as existing. It is clear that it can 
only be so thought in the measure in which it is given in an 
immediate relationship either to itself or to another. And as soon 
as we state the problem in this way we are on the road to a solu- 
tion. For it is clear that the datum common to my consciousness 
and to other possible consciousnesses is my body. I cannot think 
of myself as existing save in so far as I am a datum for other 
consciousnesses, that is to say in so far as I am a datum in space. 


January 19th 


At this point we reach a dangerous and obscure point in the 
theory. There seems no denying that I can be a datum to myself 
otherwise than in space, for instance as affectivity. From there 
on we have a new mode of existence whose relation to the spatial 
mode of existence seems singularly difficult to determine. Of 
course my consciousness cannot be a datum given as a whole 
either to itself or to other consciousnesses except as body. But, 
on another plane of existence, might it not be a datum for itself— 
exclusively? It is plain that this means raising the whole problem 
of what is commonly called the relations of soul with body. 


18 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


From the standpoint I have adopted, can I throw some light 
on this? 

It seems impossible to set aside absolutely the following 
problem at least. There is an immediate relation between my 
consciousness and my body in so far as the latter is a datum in 
space (of course this does not exclude the idea of a construction 
_ of the body’s image; what I mean here is that the relation between 
my consciousness and my body is given as immediate, and that is 
all we need take into account). 

But between consciousness and body there is another relation 
inasmuch as my body is a datum given to internal perception 
(coenesthésique); and here, it seems, we are dealing with two abso- 
lutely distinct modes of existence. One is by definition objective, 
that is to say it applies to any consciousness endowed with con- 
ditions of perception analogous to ours; the other is by definition 
purely individual, i.e. bound up with my consciousness. Of course, 
inasmuch as I abstract from myself as ego and adopt the point of 
view of a consciousness in general, I identify the reality of my 
body with what my body is for perception. But that can be regar- 
ded as arbitrary. These two modes of existence are irreducibly 
distinct. We have seen that if a content be subtended under them, 
it is on condition that this content is not itself thought of as 
susceptible of being a datum for a consciousness in an immediate 
relation. It is an intelligible, that is to say, a totality of relations 
that can only be thought (only in virtue of an illusion could 
this totality be converted into a metaphysical entity). I can, if I 
wish, call this totality unconscious, but only in a critical sense 
and neither metaphysically nor psychologically. 

Between the respective data of what I shall call the subjective 
consciousness and what can be called the perceiving or objective 
consciousness we must conceive a harmony; but we must not 
allow ourselves to think of this harmony as susceptible of being 
a datum for any consciousness whatsoever. 

As I see things, all we have the right to conclude from the 
foregoing (which seems to me myself full of mysteries) is that 
from the moment that the body is a datum given to the con- 
sciousness in two irreducibly different ways, any reduction of the 
reality of the body to a purely spatial (mechanical) whole, must 
be regarded as only having a phenomenal character. Hardly any 


19 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


reflection is needed, I think, to make that quite clear. Inasmuch 
as I think, that is to say, that I transcend these two modes of 
existence of myself, and I do not allow myself to regard them as 
appearances of an existing content, I posit the reality of an 
entirely intelligible content which itself necessarily transcends 
this reduction. 

But does this authorise us to posit the possibility of isolating 
these two modes of existence, to posit that consciousness can be 
a datum for itself in a purely internal relation? I do not think so. 
It seems to me evident that these two modes are in fact indis- 
soluble and that they complete each other. It is perhaps even 
possible to maintain that the body can only be a datum for me in 
an internal relationship because it is a datum for me spatially. Here 
we have a question of genetic psychology which does not concern 
the philosopher. However it may be, I prefer to affirm the indis- 
solubility or close solidarity of the two modes of existence. 

Then how is the thinking subject defined in function of this 
datum? And over and above the physical datum which is not per- 
ceived exclusively from within, is there not a psychical datum of 
an exclusively external character? 

I will begin by replying to the second question. It is perfectly 
clear from what has already been said, that we cannot speak of 
an internal physical datum; there we have a mode of reality of 
something which, as we know, can only be thought (henceforward 
I shall call it an Idea). But this simple remark should be enough 
to show that the question we are asking is in reality complex and 
even obscure. It clearly follows from what we have said that the 
denominations ‘physical’ and ‘psychical’ do not enlighten us on 
the nature of the Idea; or rather that as the Idea, inasmuch as it is 
thought, is not reduced to a datum of any kind whatsoever, it can 
neither be defined as psychical nor as physical. If, then, there even 
exists a datum which is purely psychical, that is to say one that 
does not correspond to a physical datum—in other words, even if, 
in the end, the correspondence that I have indicated between the 
two modes of existence cannot be admitted—it will nevertheless 
remain that this purely psychic datum must be regarded as the ex- 

pression of an Idea which in itself only defines itself as Idea 
(and hence not as psychical). Of course at the outset it is not 
possible to determine the relation between the Idea which now 


20 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


appears to us and the preceding Idea. But, it may be said, the 
necessity of admitting an Idea of the psychical seems in no way 
evident. I expetience a feeling; whether this feeling has or has not 
an organic correlative (datum for a possible consciousness), 
inasmuch as it is psychical it suffices in itself; there is no need 
whatever to subtend an intelligible substitute for the psychical 
_datum. The answer seems to be as follows: if we admit that the 
psychical datum in question suffices in itself, and there is no 
need to appeal to an intelligible content, how comes it that this 
was not also true previously? Are we to see the explanation in 
the fact that previously we were in the presence of two modes of 
existence that needed unifying (in the intelligible); and that now, 
on the contrary, we are only in the presence of a single mode 
of existence and in consequence the difficulty collapses? This 
answer is invalidated in the following way: first of all it seems 
dangerous to deny dogmatically all remaining correspondence 
between the two modes of existence; then, if the psychical here 
functions as reality, why could it not similarly function as reality 
at the preceding stage? True we have seen that this was impossible 
(because the two modes of existence are irreducible) but then why 
the change? To justify it, we would need to establish a difference 
of nature between data which, as data, do not appear to have any 
distinction. Moreover, as an exact analysis of psychical life would 
easily show, it is necessary to interpret an effective development 
in function of the individual logic (itself Idea) which is trans- 
lated into it. 

And so we reach this general conclusion that there exists 
between immediate consciousness and thought (the thinking 
subject) the same relation as between the datum (whatever it be, 
even if it be purely psychical) and the Idea, that is, the intelligible 
content, not posited as existing, which while still maintaining its 
contingent character, alone can justify the datum. 

Note that in view of the critical way in which we have been 
led to think the Idea, from our present standpoint it is quite 
impossible for us to speak either of a single Idea or of a world of 
Ideas. What makes the question confused even in its terms is that 
clearly from the spatial point of view the body is in relation to all 
that surrounds it, it is prolonged, so to speak, in its surroundings. 
And on the other hand our internal perception does seem to 


21 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


bear only on the states of the body. And so if from one viewpoint 
it seems unreasonable to posit an Idea of the body, from the other 
it seems certain that the content ought to present a certain char- 
acter of individuality. | 

All that we know and all that we can legitimately affirm so 
far is this: In so far as my consciousness transcends itself as 
immediate it is obliged to think an intelligible content which does 
not participate in existence; and this content has the ambiguous 
character of being itself and at the same time issuing out from 
itself (to pass into its other, as Hegel would say). It seems to me 
that this only becomes intelligible if we posit the absolute soli- 
darity and even the identity of these two aspects; if, that is, we 
understand that this content is only in itself when it issues out 
from itself. It is only by the movement of its parts (relatively 
immanent action) and the actions taking place between the spatial 
datum (the body) and what surrounds it, that internal perception 
is possible. This ought not, I must repeat, to be understood in a 
causal way. As we have already seen, the modes of existence are 
radically distinct. The correlation itself can only be conceived 
through the medium of the intelligible unity that founds it, that 
is, thought needs to posit a subject of this double becoming, a 
subject placed in some way at the intersection of this double 
becoming. Only this subject is not existent; it can only be thought. 
A critique of the notion of this subject can only be made when we 
forget it is a notion, that is, when we show that the subject thus 
posited presents no psychological or sense characteristics (no 
qualitative determination) and as nothing exists save what has 
quality, we conclude that it is nothing—and that because we 
forget the fundamental distinction between what is existing 
(i.e. in relation to immediate consciousness) and what is real 


(i.e. only defined for thought). 


January 20th 


Only a little examination is required, I think, for us to see that, 
as thus stated, things are still too simple and too schematised; 
and that the dualism of what I have called the immediate con- 
sciousness on the one hand, and of thought strictly speaking on 
the other, is not really in accord with my definition. For, in fact, 
from the moment at which judgment takes place, immediate 


22 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


consciousness is revealed to be nothing but an abstraction con- 
tradictory in itself. I have proceeded thus far as if the datum 
itself required no construction. But it is clear that a series of 
existences (a succession) requires, as Kant saw, an activity to 
form the data into a complete whole and so, as a result, is not 
reducible to immediate consciousness—for the latter, on the con- 

trary, is only apprehension of the instantaneous; and in the 
measure in which the instantaneous really supposes a whole that 
conditions it, it negates itself, and with it immediate conscious- 
ness is also negated. For the dualism previously posited between 
modes of existence corresponding to immediate consciousness on 
the one hand and to the intelligible content opposed to these 
modes—in some way as substance to accidents—on the other, we 
now seem to have substituted the idea of a constructive activity 
which is realised at one and the same time in the two orders and 
even makes possible what appeared to depend exclusively on 
immediate consciousness. 

But here, I feel, we must take care. For in this relation to 
immediate consciousness from which we started out, are we not 
tempted to view existence itself as a sort of phenomenon begotten 
by the intelligible movement of that activity? Instead of on the one 
hand the order of what exists and on the other the order of what 
is above existence, we might end up with something like the re- 
absorption of existence into the womb of constructing thought. 
But has not thought already been defined by the very act by which 
it transcends immediate consciousness, and does it not negate 
itself in the measure in which it claims to make an abstraction of 
the immediate consciousness? Here we must try to dissipate a 
whole series of confusions. 

My consciousness is actually ‘occupied’ by a certain per- 
ceptive content that it ipso facto posits as existing—and perhaps 
we are already up against the question of what is the relation 
between this judgment of existence (by the way, is it a judgment?) 
and the datum itself. Is this judgment constructive or does it 
really make explicit? And even if it serves to make explicit ought 
we not to say that it is for thought that it is constructed as making 
explicit, in relation to something explicit constructed similarly? 
Before trying to answer I think we should ask ourselves whether 
it is legitimate or not to set aside the fact that the content is 


23 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


already a (psychologically) constructed content. The chairs, the 
table, the fire etc. that I see in front of me are defined in function 
of the awarenesses of the potential consciousness (awarenesses of 
the consciousness that remain virtual); while the wood on which 
my paper rests, and that my hand touches, is itself as actual for me 
as it is susceptible of being, because it is in direct contact with a part 
of my body. It is evident that wherever there is no direct contact 
there occurs a construction of a state of consciousness that would 
correspond to the contact; and that this state of consciousness 
generally condenses itself into a sort of abstract symbol. But where 
there is contact I think there is a positing of an existant, an entirely 
spontaneous positing that cannot really be called a judgment. 
The accord of the senses may well provide a check, but nothing, 
more, for the spontaneous positing is realised before the check 
has necessarily functioned. What relation is there between this 
positing and the datum? 

Here it seems to me essential to note that the problem when 
raised, by the very fact of being raised, transforms its terms. It 
is presented in the form of a question bearing on a relation be- 
tween distinct terms. But the terms are only distinct because the 
problem is raised. There is a solidarity between the distinctness 
of the terms and the very fact that the problem is raised. As 
soon as the problem is raised we are led on to say either that the 
positing, as existent, only makes something explicit that must lie 
under the datum (i.e. the very foundation of existence) or else that 
it is an addition made by thought. But a little simple reflection is 
enough to show that both solutions are equally inacceptable, 
because the very act by which we question ourselves on the basis 
of the union of the terms is precisely that which separates them. 
(It is probable that at the root of the equivocation that I have just 
indicated there lies a confusion between existence in general and 
spatial existence or externality.) 

In this way we escape, I think, from the dilemma by which 
existence is turned either into a predicate or else into a sort of 
ontological quality that comes from outside and is added to that 
which exists. The notion of a judgment of existence bearing on an 
object is only substituted for the positing of a datum as existing 
achieved by the intervention of thought. 

But it is important to understand that the immediate consci- 


24 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


ousness in which there is as yet no dualism between the datum and 
a form (°?) of existence, can only be posited by an act by which re- 
flective thought becomes aware of that which came from itself in 
the preceding act, and sets about making an abstraction of it. 

Henceforward I will call this positing as existent (in which 
existence is not defined as a predicate) experience-limit; and say 
_ that experience-limit can only be thought by an act of reflection 
brought to bear on the dualism of the judgment of existence and 
of that on which this judgment is made. This experience-limit, 
inasmuch as the reflecting subject claims to disentangle its objec- 
tive content, is reduced to a contact between a body bound up 
with a perceiving consciousness, and an external datum. Re- 
flective thought thus posits the judgment of existence as being 
the transposition of the experience-limit into the intellectual order 
(where there are objects and judgments bearing on those objects); 
and this goes for any judgment of existence whatsoever. From 
this standpoint we can see how only that which is capable of 
entering into relations of contact, i.e. spatial relations with my 
body, can be said to exist. That may serve as a definition: 

It is important to know how I am led to posit the judgment 
_ of existence, to dissociate existence from that which exists. To 
account for this I think we need to have recourse to the phe- 
nomena of becoming and also to illusions (hallucinations). 

It is plain that it is only when reflective thought is brought 
to bear on it that the experience-limit reveals its spatial content. 
In itself, so to speak, it is the immediate considered in all its 
purity. But inasmuch as it reflects itself, it is necessarily con- 
verted into an affirmation regarding spatial data. To say that 
nothing exists save what is in space is merely to say that the ex- 
perience-limit can only be translated into thought on condition 
that it is converted into an affirmation regarding spatial data. 

From this point of view we can see how the problem of the 
existence of the external world strictly speaking has no meaning at 
all, for the external world is implicitly posited as something which 
exists (or does not exist) amongst other things. 

And so if we can speak of thinking existence, it is solely 
in so far as consciousness—if it can so be expressed—can project 
itself backwards and itself conceive itself as realising the ex- 
perience-limit as translated into a historical judgment. In this 


B* 25 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


sense it can be said that imagination (conceived as the faculty 
thanks to which consciousness can be projected or transposed) 
is the transcendental condition of history. 

So henceforward we must consider all claims to attribute 
existence to what cannot be represented in space as completely 
meaningless. 

But then if we conceive of consciousnesses organised dif- 
ferently from ours, consciousnesses whose different sensorial 
apparatus enables them to apprehend data inaccessible to us, can 
we conceive the data in question as non-existent? To this we must 
reply that we can only represent such data to ourselves as in some 
way situated in space, and that hence there is no reason to deny 
their existence. Here I am tending to modify what I said earlier 
about the modes of existence in order to simplify it; but in last 
analysis there is no real difference between what I am saying here 
and what I said previously. ; 

It would obviously be absurd to view all this in terms of a 
realism of a spatial character. As is immediately clear, the whole 
theory is in accord with Kantian idealism. 

When we say that the experience-limit has a spatial foundation 
we only mean that, corresponding to each positing ‘position’ of a 
datum given as existing by whatsoever consciousness for another 
consciousness, there should be a determination of the spatial or 
physical relations between the organic body with which the first 
consciousness is bound up and the external world. These relations 
can be called the truth of the experience-limit. Of course the 
distinction between the two consciousnesses cannot present an 
empirical character but only a transcendental one; we have only 
stated the harmony between the immediate consciousness (ex- 
perience-limit) and the reflective consciousness which determines 
relations in space, though the latter may be elsewhere or may be 
not actual. 


January 21st 


Ican see the problem that now arises very clearly. Is truth possible 
regarding what is not manifested in space? The question itself 
involves a dilemma. Either there can be truth regarding that which 
cannot be posited as existing, or else we must admit a judgment of 
existence that has no bearing on spatial relations. If we reject the 


26 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


dilemma, we have to deny that truth is possible regarding what 
is not realised in space. 


January 23rd 


On what conditions can we think something to be truth? First of 
all we must determine the exact meaning of this problem, and the 
limits within which it can have a meaning. We are not concerned 
with finding a standard by which we can determine whether an _ 
idea (for instance) is true or not; but with knowing the conditions 
which an order must satisfy to permit of truth. But it may be 
claimed that as soon as we raise the problem we have already 
solved it, and that we have done so in a contradictory way that is 
equivalent to positing that it is insoluble. For we are involved in 
positing the transcendence of thought in relation to truth. But if 
thought is not in itself a form of truth, then truth has no existence, 
and if it is in itself'a form of truth this determination is impossible. 
This reasoning seems to me only valid in appearance. Even if in 
itself thought is the form of truth, it still remains that this form 
must be separated for itself from the ore of contingency that 
encloses it; and that, on a higher level, posits that thought is not 
involved in the dualism in question. 


January 24th 


What relation are we to establish between the true and the thought 
that verifies it? Ordinary thought posits that the activity of veri- 
fication is contingent in relation to what is verified. It defines the 
true as being anterior to its verification. But is it absolutely inde- 
pendent of it? And what, strictly speaking, is the exact meaning 
of the question? If we are told that the capacity for verification 
enters into the very definition of the true, the first objection 
aroused in our minds is that some things are true though they 
have never been verified, and indeed are incapable of being veri- 
fied. (For instance historical events may have occurred without 
leaving a trace, and these are none the less true for being unveri- 
fiable.) So if we are to define the true in terms of its verifiability, it 
is on condition that we make a distinction between the material 
conditions of verification that may be lacking, and conditions that 
are purely ideal. But is this distinction valid? If not, then we must 
either give up defining the true in terms of the verifiable, or else 


27 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


think the true purely empirically in function of thought subject 
to restrictions of fact (and not merely of right). But this last 
alternative is plainly unacceptable. We are not prepared to accept 
the denial of the historical truth of something which, for factual 
reasons, we can no longer determine. And the reason for this is 
that we admit the existence of a link between what in practice 
can and what cannot be verified. Between one group of data and 
the other there is only a purely superficial difference, a difference 
that thought, out of duty to itself, must treat as negligible. The 
same applies to whatever is thought in space though escaping the 
observation of our present instruments. And so if the distinction 
between conditions of fact and conditions of right is invalid, we 
are forced purely and simply to abandon the possibility of veri- 
fication as part of the definition of the true. In other words, if 
between what is relatively and what is absolutely unverifiable 
there is only a difference of .degree—because that which is only 
relatively unverifiable cannot fail to be thought of as susceptible 
of truth—we are bound to recognise the possibility of truth even 
regarding what evades verification by definition. But has this any 
meaning? That which by definition evades verification is not that 
which cannot be reproduced but that which is not inserted into 
a whole that thought can reconstitute, that which is not in a 
determinable relation to the rest of the content of thought. Here 
again in what sense can we speak of truth? 

Inasmuch as it can be predicated of the unknowable, truth is 
here confounded with existence, it is nothing more than an 
abstract denomination without content. If, then, anything is abso- 
lutely unverifiable it cannot be thought as susceptible of truth, it 
cannot be regarded as being distinguished only by the degree of 
what is relatively unverifiable. And in consequence no real (and 
formal) objection can be opposed to the idea that verifiability is a 
constituent of truth (since the factual and ideal conditions can 
be regarded as distinct). 

But if nothing is absolutely unverifiable (here the meaning 
of the question itself is far from clear), does not the idea become 
purely tautological? And how can we continue to dissociate 
factual from ideal conditions? Supposing everything were veri- 
fiable ideally, yet we were unable to determine some particular 
point, this could only be for factual (hence contingent) reasons. 


28 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


We could certainly affirm the identity of truth and of being; 
and the finiteness of thought, for which there are still things 
unverifiable, would reside in contingent circumstances with 
which thought is bound up. In this sense thought would have a 
double nature; an intelligible nature affirming the identity of being 
and the true (universal verifiability) and a contingent nature 
noting the factual restrictions which, according to the affirmation 
of the intelligible nature, in no way concern the rational content. 


January 26th 


To return to the problem I raised the day before yesterday. We 
know that ideal and actual conditions cannot be regarded as really 
separable unless there is something absolutely unverifiable. Only 
what does there is mean? For, as we can see immediately, this 
unverifiable something should not be thought to be unverifiable 
for reasons of fact. Hence it cannot be in space or even in time for, 
were it so given, reasons of fact alone might make verification 
impossible. But, if there are grounds for what I have already said, 
we cannot, strictly speaking, attribute existence to this unverifiable 
something (since existence resides in the relation to the immediate 
consciousness, posited ideally at least). And in this way the ques- 
tion of the relation of truth and of existence is resolved. For we 
have seen that truth implies the possibility of verification arfd on 
the other hand we have had to admit that what is outside space 
and time (that is, what cannot be thought as existent) is non- 
verifiable. We are incapable of not thinking truth about that which 
exists, but to speak of truth regarding what is outside existence is a 
contradiction in terms. This is a cardinal point and seems to me to 
be the very key to my thought. Meanwhile if the there is cannot be 
taken in an existential sense, either it is meaningless and we cannot 
speak of absolute unverifiability, or else we must define the mean- 
ing that it is possible to attribute to it. 

I note that the agreement between what I am saying here and 
the Kantian view extends a long way. In fact, in both, truth, far 
from being defined as a logical form, is a function of what can be 
called potential experience. Kant’s only mistake lay in his failure to 
see all the implications of this position, and the fact that he treated 
things-in-themselves as susceptible of a truth which cannot have 
being for our thought, which is a contradiction. 


a) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


We cannot speak of absolute unverifiability unless we can 
in some way think a ‘beyond’ of existence. Notice that this 
‘beyond’ is implied in the very notion of truth which just now 
seemed to us correlative with the notion of existence. The fact 
is that truth is only possible for thought when it liberates itself 
from the conditions of time and space. Truth only regards what 
is in space and in time, but a truth is only for thought which is 
defined non-spatially and non-temporally. Such thought cannot 
without contradiction posit itself as existing; and that is equivalent 
to saying that it is free. 

Freedom, which is the condition of all verification, cannot 
itself be thought save as radically unverifiable, that is, as liberated 
from the conditions of existence which an object must satisfy if 
it is to be an object of verification (determined as truth). 

When we speak of the Truth, of the Idea of the True, we in- 
voluntarily confuse the objective whole that seems to compose the 
integral system of the determinations of the true for our imagin- 
ative thought, with the free thought on which all verification 
depends. : 

In this way we find we have entered the realm of mind which 
is the realm of freedom. 

But we need to be more specific. How can we justify or even 
merely describe the judgment by which we bind up the verifi- 
cation (the act of verifying) with thought that is transcendent in 
relation to all verification? The judgment in question, it seems, 
must be true or false. But then we fall into a contradiction. So we 
are forced to deny the dilemma absolutely and maintain that the 
judgment belongs to an order in which we can no longer talk of 
truth or falsehood. For the mind the true is defined as indepen- 
dent of the mind. This may be an illusion but for all that the mind 
is bound to posit truths as subsisting independently of the know- 
ledge it has of them. Whereas the act by which the unverifiable 
is thought really constitutes it. This needs to be gone into more 
deeply. When thought reflects on the movement by which truths 
are constituted, it recognises the necessity of thinking that move- 
ment in function of a purely intelligible activity. But does this 
mean that that activity appears as a factual condition, as existent? 
_ Obviously not. The factual conditions that govern the search for 
truth should be capable of being defined psychologically. We can 


30 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


conceive the possibility of a psychology of the search for truth 
which would take all the subjective factors into account (interest, 
curiosity, desire for glory, etc.).... Strictly speaking all this 
can be regarded as object for verification. But the pure activity 
about which we are speaking is only capable of appearing to a 
reflection that itself bears on the conditions of the possibility of 
the true (not on the motives an individual follows when he is 
seeking for the truth). It is pure reflection, then, that introduces 
the idea of this activity—which is equivalent to saying that it 
brings it into being and creates it, because it itself is the very 
activity in question and is only capable of thinking itself as 
identical with it. The act by which I think freedom is the very act 
by which freedom comes to be. Here the ego seems in some sort 
to be the intelligible medium by which freedom effects the tran- 
sition from idea to being. But it is clear that this act of creation is 
nothing save the cogito. Thought creates itself when it thinks 
itself; it does not discover itself, it constitutes itself. 

Moreover, elementary reflection on the possible nature of an 
absolutely unverifiable something permits us to establish that this 
_is only unverifiable when it constitutes and creates itself. Other- 
wise it would be a pure datum, a pure existant. 

It must be noted that if the unverifiable in question is @ priori, 
it can only be so inasmuch as it is constituted in opposition to 
an experience and in relationship with it. 

When we suppose we are positing (in existence or still only 
objectively) the absolute independence of God, we are really on 
the contrary only binding up God with immediate consciousness. 
I never saw the antinomy so clearly. It amounts to saying that the 
problem of the existence of God can only be stated in mystical 
terms, in terms of experience. But on that plane it is destined to 
be answered negatively, because when the unverifiable descends 
into existence, it substitutes itself for existing causes, and when 
reflective thought comes back into it, it is obliged to operate in an 
inverse way and reintroduce the causes. Here lies the real dialectic 
of divine existence. Divine existence only is in immediate relation 
to empirical consciousness, whereas the relation is defined for 
reflection as action of an existant upon an existant, that is, as not 
of the divine order. 

But we are anticipating what is to follow. All that I am 


31 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


positing for the moment is that thought raises the problem of the 
existence of God by a contradictory step. Existence, to speak 
generally, is that from which all thought is able to set out, in the 
sense that thought cannot define itself save by the movement by 
which it transcends the immediate datum. Hence existence cannot 
at any level be regarded as a demonstrandum, a point at which we 
end up. As thought is unable to lay the foundations of the imme- 
diate relation—it can only surpass them—the idea of the demon- 
stration of the existence of God involves a contradiction and 
collapses. If there is an experience of God (and only in this sense 
can we speak of the existence of God) that experience must be 
a point of departure and no more. Moreover, we know that the 
experience must, as such, seem to reason to be self-destructive. 

It is perhaps time to recall that, though existence is the im- 
mediate relation, it is the immediate relation as it negates itself 
as such (and is posited as the suppression of the relation). To posit 
the existence of God really means positing a relation between God 
and the immediate consciousness, but explicitly it means denying 
that relation. 

But how can thought affirm God without positing him as 
existing, in other words without even affirming him as a truth? 
Obviously it can only do this on condition that it is faith. Only 
here we need to dispel a whole crowd of ambiguities. We have to 
free ourselves of the idea that between faith and knowledge there 
is the same relation as the relation between probability and cert- 
ainty. Faith is not an act by which we approximate to a judgment 
of existence which cannot be formulated as such (in view of our 
finite nature). Only if it transcends knowledge can faith justify 
itsel{— otherwise when we assign existence to God we are realising 
him in space and time. 


January 27th 


We need to define more accurately the kind of affirmation that 
has the character of faith. To begin with I note that if existence 
cannot properly be ascribed to God (from the standpoint of 
thought) neither can non-existence. To deny the existence of 
something is in fact to affirm that, for empirical reasons, that 
thing is not realised in experience. I believe that we must distin- 
guish this radically from the act by which we affirm the impossi- 


32 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


bility of a given object. A square circle, for instance, is denied as 
essence before it is denied as existence, and the negation of the 
essence is alone important. But to deny the existence of God 
would not be to think of God as contradictory, it would be to say 
that God is not manifested to experience. So we perceive two 
radically distinct ways of denying the existence of God (always 

on the plane of thought). One of them comes back to treating 
God as an empirical object and saying “This object is not met 
with in experience.” The other consists in the statement that God 
cannot be treated as an empirical object and that by consequence 
existence cannot be attributed to him. These two affirmations are 
more than distinct, they are inverse. The philosophers who ad- 
mitted the ontological proof had the immense merit of seeing the 
absurdity of the first way of denying the existence of God. It is 
even absurd in virtue of its postulate; in that it posits God ideally 
as an empirical object, only then to deny him. The philosophers 
in question saw that the existence of God cannot possibly be 
denied on empirical grounds. They concluded that it was neces- 
sary to affirm his existence. At a deep level I am convinced that 
the argument is valid and that it is only in its form that it cannot 
stand. Because the reasons which render the negation of the exis- 
tence of God impossible are the very reasons which militate 
against the affirmation of his existence. The real contradiction 
comes if we think of God as an existant—it is a useless contradic- 
tion that vitiates thesis and antithesis alike. Hence we must cease 
to base the denial of God on reasons of an empirical order (if God 
is not an empirical object it is obvious that he is not to be met with 
in experience). Nor can the denial of God be based on considera- 
tions of essence—on saying, for instance: “As the divine essence 
implies a contradiction it negates itself as essence.” Here, I think, 
Leibnitz’ argument can be accepted as genuinely making such a 
demonstration impossible. But I think we must tackle the question 
in another way. For our concern must be whether there can be 
essences which do not manifest themselves as existences. Of 
course it is possible to say that the existence that corresponds to 
the divine essence is that of the world itself. But that is either 
vague and inappropriate or else it is contradictory. As I have said 
elsewhere, existence cannot be attributed to the world in that the 
world is the size of things that exist. 


33 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


At this point let us recall that essences are defined in function 
of thought, and hence of the movement by which thought elevates 
itself above existences. It seems to me that to set aside the negative 
but real relation which unites essence with that which exists is to 
suppress a perfectly real moment which is constitutive of essence 
and to make it something purely abstract. So it can be maintained 
that to deny God as existing is indirectly (but absolutely) to deny 
him as essence. Is this an absolute denial? Or can the negation of 
God as existing be converted in some way into an affirmation? 
We must return to this cardinal point. 

To deny God as existing, in our sense, is to refuse absolutely 
to treat him as an empirical object, and at the same time and in 
consequence to deny (and the negation is transformed into a 
negation of itself, that is, into the negation of a negation) that 
anything in experience, that anything in that which exists, can be 
incompatible with God, can exclude God. In this way the negation 
of the existence of God is converted into an affirmation of the 
power of God as transcendent as regards all that is empirically 
possible. This links up with Leibnitz. 

But obviously here we have to face some serious objections. 
Setting aside all subsequent difficulties it may be argued at the 
outset that the foregoing process of argument is fundamentally 
vicious. On what grounds have we posited that from the stand- 
point of thought, existence cannot be attributed to God? Is it not 
because we think that existence as defined in a particular way is 
incompatible with God himself, who is viewed as a determined 
content (as essence); and does not the whole pseudo-demonstra- 
tion rest on an ingenious arrangement of concepts? Here we must 
take care. I maintain, first of all, that we are not free to think 
of existence as anything other than I have said, that is to say, 
other than the relation to an immediate consciousness (negating 
itself as such, moreover, inasmuch as it is not thought). But the 
weightiest objection is still to come. Do we not set out by de- 
fining God in a special way only so as then to deny him existence? 
This objection does not seem to me to hit the mark. In what- 
soever way thought thinks God, it is unable to posit him as a 
datum given to the subject in an external way. I do not say that 
it is impossible that an empirical relation should appear to be 


established between God and the subject. What I say is that this 
34 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


occurs not from the standpoint of thought but from the stand- 
point of the immediate consciousness, a very different matter. 
Notice, moreover, that even in order to deny God we must first 
of all think him in some way—otherwise our negation is purely 
indeterminate. 
But there is another difficulty that seems to me much more 
serious. If, from the fact that nothing in experience can exclude 
_ God (be stronger than God), we conclude that God is at least 
power, are we not playing with words? And what meaning can 
we attribute to the word power? 

We have seen that God is beyond even essence, which 
amounts strictly speaking to saying that there is no divine nature. 
But in that case are we not making him indeterminate? Does not 
‘being’ mean ‘being something’? 303034 

At this point we need to subject the result we have reached so 
far to rigorous examination. We have said that the negation of 
God as existing entails the affirmation of God as transcendent. 
This means that we must think God as transcending every deter- 
mination whatsoever. Are we going to end up with the Alexan- 
drian One? We must recognise, I think, Plotinus’ idea that God 
is veritably for us only in so far as we participate in him. But it 
is important that we should transpose the surviving elements 
of objective emanationism in Plotinus into the order of mind, 
the subjective order. I do not think that Alexandrianism can 
really help us to resolve the difficulties we now have to deal 
with. 

We know that if God can and must be thought as power, it is 
only on condition that by power we do not understand an existing 
power susceptible of functioning as cause amongst other causes. 
But how are we to conceive the relation of such transcendent 
power to the order of things existing? It is clear at the outset that 
the possibility of a direct relation between one and the other must 
be denied absolutely. An objective doctrine of creationism must 
be rejected out of hand. As I see things, the process we adopt 
so as to demonstrate the legitimacy of our affirmation of God 
implies the rejection of creationism. Further on we shall see 
whether creationism can and must reappear in a deeper sense 
(the idea of divine fatherhood preceding and justifying the idea 


of creation). If, then, God is conceived as a freedom it is on 
35 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


condition that that freedom is not thought of as creating the 
world. 

But is it not possible to object that the proof by means of the 
idea exhibits the same defects as the other proofs? If the idea is 
denied, what remains of the proof? I believe that this will take us 
much deeper into the question. The objection rests on the im- 
plicit postulate that the idea can be false, that it participates in 
the order of the true and the false; that hence it supposes a 
transition from the idea to the ideatum, a ticklish transition 
whenever the idea is not constructed as in mathematics. But here 
we must bear in mind how very unacceptable that postulate is. 
The affirmation regarding God is not, cannot be, and must never 
be regarded as an idea. It essentially partakes of what, earlier, 
I called the ‘absolutely unverifiable.’ 


January 28th 


But if we are dealing with the unverifiable, are we not also in- 
volved in the arbitrary? So as to guarantee ourselves against the 
risk of criticism it looks as though we ought to be able to establish 
a link between the unverifiable that is the cogito and the unveri- 
fiable that is God. Thus stated, the problem takes on terms that 
are almost Cartesian. But is it not insoluble? For either we have an 
implication of notions and do not depart from the logic of essence 
—but that is impossible because the cogito itself is not an essence 
—or else we seem forced to abandon the discovery of any nec- 
essity whatever, any basis of mediation. The problem could only 
be solved were it possible to determine the conditions of what I 
have elsewhere called a logic of freedom, that is, an order as- 
signed by freedom to itself. But are we in a position to deduce 
such an order from the cogito? There seems to be a hiatus between 
the cogito and the affirmation regarding God. Can it be bridged? 

The first moment of the solution seems to me to be as follows: 
I have already said that the unverifiable which is the cogito— 
that is, that which can be called formal freedom—is only for the 
free act that apprehends it. Here we must avoid being taken in 
by the image we use, the image of discovery, which is fallacious. 
Thought does not discover itself, it is constituted, and the cogito 
which is the very act of discovery (rather than an object suscep- 
tible of being discovered) is identical with the reflection on the 


36 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


cogito, it only zs for this reflection and it only is this reflection 
(inasmuch as it is act). The ‘I think’ is neither a datum nor a 
form, it is an act. Here I think Descartes penetrated more deeply 
than Kant. The unverifiable, then, is a function of the free act, 
it is the track of it, it is the entirely negative expression of the 
fact that the free act becomes for itself a mystery as soon as it is 
transformed into objective thought (it being characteristic of 

objective thought that it negates itself for the benefit of its 
object). I do not think we can go further than this in determining 
the idea of the unverifiable. 

But how can we get beyond that first free act—which seems 
likewise to be the last? At first sight this difficulty appears 
inextricable. | 

Note that we have made some real progress, for we have 
broken with formalism. We are no longer taken in by that post- 
Kantian formalism that hypostatises the / think and so turns it 
into a sort of timeless form (I am thinking especially of T. H. 
Green). But for all that are we not still the prisoners of some 
sort of ambiguous and sterile subjectivism? 

We already know, at least, that the unverifiable is far from 
arbitrary, that, on the contrary, it is the source of every rule and 
the principle of any order whatsoever. 

The first link between the cogito and the affirmation of God 
is, I think, manifest even to purely external reflection, reflection 
limited to bringing together the terms on which it bears. We 
have seen, in fact, that God can only be defined as the affirmation 
of absolute freedom. Now a freedom can only be affirmed by a 
freedom. As long as thought is not raised to the level of the 
cogito, as long as it does not think itself as freedom (as free act 
thinking itself) it can have no real freedom and hence there is 
no divine freedom. 

But this takes us more deeply into the problem. Does not all 
that we have so far said about divine power (posited as non- 
existing) also apply to the cogito which likewise transcends all 
experience, all possible existence and even all truth? When we 
dissociated the cogito from the affirmation regarding God, were 
we not being taken in by words? Moreover, does not the distinc- 
tion between two freedoms now seem absurd? At the heart of 
thought thinking itself (which is neither my thought nor the 


a 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


thought of a God but simply Thought) are we not obliged to 
identify two moments that reflection when superficial allows us 
to dissociate? 

What makes the question particularly obscure is this. We 
have said that God, by the fact that he could not be posited as 
existing (on the plane of thought), needed to be thought as trans- 
cending even the world of essences. But what is the God with 
which the process of our argument is now involved? If he is an 
essence, the process of argument destroys itself; if he is not an 
essence what is he? Must we admit that the process of argument 
on the whole tends to make explicit the initial content on which it 
bears (in the sense in which even the Hegelian type of synthetic 
dialectic can be regarded as a ‘making explicit’)? If God is not 
an essence, he remains an affirmation (an act): but how, in its 
turn, is this affirmation qualified? It seems it must have been in 
virtue of an intrinsic qualification of the affirmation that we looked 
on ourselves as being correct in our denial that the affirmation 
bears on an existant. Does not this qualification (by the very fact 
that it exists) convert the affirmation into an essence? If, on the 
other hand, the qualification is lacking we cannot see on what the 
negation, which is the nerve of the process of argument, can rest. 
This point is really vital. Unless it can be elucidated argument is 
not only invalid, it is meaningless. 

I think we can set aside an initial difficulty which would be 
insurmountable if admitted. Up to a certain point it is possible to 
be in the order of the qualified without being in the order of 
essence. To grasp this we only need to introduce the notion of 
the mode of affirmation (we can conceive pure, absolute affirma- 
tion, the verb; qualification, not essence). In that way we posit 
the problem in more precise and clearer terms, and realise that 
the initial difficulty lay in the grammatical form in which the 
argument was formulated. What we must say is: the affirmation 
regarding God is defined by a particular mode which is incom- 
patible with the notion of an existant, etc.; in other words faith 
(which is what we shall call that mode) belongs to the order of 
affirmation which, etc... . 

If anyone says that that mode of affirmation is only defined — 
in function of an object, an essence, we can answer that the real 
(valid) relation is the inverse; that the object is only the trans- 


38 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


lation into the language of knowledge (of that which is posited) 
of the privileged act that is faith. In this way the problem of 
God makes way for the real problem which is that of faith. 

| But here traps still lie in wait for us. Obviously the faith we 
are talking about here is not a psychological state. Moreover, we 
must be clear that faith cannot be thought as a form, it must be 
__ thought as bound up with a reality. Here the difficulty and even 
_ the danger of my attitude becomes clear. We are unquestionably 
concerned with thinking an affirmation (as we are speaking of 
faith), but it is an affirmation which cannot and must not be 
dissociated from that on which it bears. In so far as faith is denied 
for the benefit of what it affirms (which is then treated as an 
object), faith is converted into theoretical thought and is sup- 
pressed. The act by which I think faith should be the act by which 
I deny the dissociation; by which, in consequence, I deny both 
subjectivism and realism alike. We must grasp that the realist 
and subjectivist attitudes both imply the possibility of such a 
dissociation (in the first case the accent is on one aspect, in the 
second on the other). There is no internal distinction between 
them. The distinction is purely one of opinion (Memmung). 

Hence to think faith is to think faith in God. When I say 
that faith bears on God I add nothing to the idea of it. Here 
there are two aspects that I must posit as conjoined. If we like 
we can say that God is the reality of faith, but on condition we 
do not interpret this in an objective sense. 

In this way we dispose of a whole series of difficulties and, 
furthermore, we state the problem of the metaphysical justifi- 
cation of faith. 

Even the terms of this problem must be precisely expressed. 
We are concerned with justifying faith as faith, that is, faith that 
is not converted into certitude. On what conditions is this pos- 
sible? Clearly justification must not go back to establishing an 
implication of notions (cf. what was said above). Naturally what 
was said earlier regarding the transition from the cogito to the 
affirmation regarding God also applies here. ‘To put it briefly we 
have to ask ourselves how the mind can effect the transition from 
the cogito to faith, from the J think to the J believe; that is to say, 
how one free act can depend on another free act (as the link 
between them cannot be derived from a logic of essence—this 


39 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


last term being given the meaning it bears in current philosophy, 
not the strict Hegelian sense). Or, to put the question in another 
form, how can such dependence have value (ge/ten) without being 
either logical in the strict sense or objective? The difficulty of 
determining what value is, is bound up with the fact that in the 
theoretical or even in the ethical order (which is only a transpo- 
sition of it) the current meaning is manifestly of no value. 

It seems there cannot be value (ge/ten) for thought outside 
a certain formalism, but it must be noticed that the formalism 
that can concern us here must not bear on thought in general 
(otherwise we would remain in what I have called the logic of 
essence). Here there can only be question of what, for lack of a 
better term, I shall call an individual formalism. Faith is only 
possible on condition that from the cogito there springs forth 
that which is individual. 


January 29th 

I maintain—and this is a cardinal point—that, in the / think and in 
the J believe, the subject does not play one and the same part. 
I have said that the ego is the medium of freedom, that is to say, 
with the cogito the ego expresses the act by which freedom posits 
itself. But this ego is universal, or it is at least suppressed in the 
universality of the thinking subject. Inasmuch as I think, I am 
universal, and, if knowledge is dependent on the cogito, that is 
precisely in virtue of the universality inherent in the thinking ego. 
In faith there is nothing of the kind. It is precisely the absence of 
this clear distinction that causes the equivocations which have 
always played around the idea of a ‘Vernunfétreligion’. Either 
religion is reduced to a totality of purely rational affirmations, 
that is, assertions valid for thought in general, and so is no 
more than an abstract and empty deism (and is arbitrary as 
well—I shall return to this point); or else it ceases to be based 
on a universal and is thus no more than a sentimental and 
purely subjective scaffolding. The true road lies between the 
two. 

The subject of faith is not thought in general. Thought in 
general in so far as it is reflected (and, as a result, is objectified) 
appears to itself as purely abstract, purely indeterminate, a formal 
condition and nothing more. The subject of faith, on the contrary, 


40 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


must be concrete. Does that mean that the subject of faith is the 
empirical content which I have called individual? Without going 
back over the ambiguities of the idea of the ego conceived in a 
realist sense (James, Bradley), it is worth observing that the 
subject of faith cannot be a datum given—in any case it would 
only be a datum that would suppress itself as datum, setting itself 
aside in an effort at reconstruction. Just as we cannot accept the 
objective relation between faith and God (cf. above) so, as regards 
the rdle of the ego in faith, we must be careful over the insuffi- 
ciency and even the unreality of the relation of subject to 
act. . 

I am tempted to say at this point that, in the measure in which 
sociology has reacted against moral and psychological atomism, 
it has smoothed the path for a religious philosophy such as the 
one I am trying to define. 

This is as much as to say that if faith cannot be conceived 
as a relation of forces (a sort of dynamism operating between 
objectively realised terms) neither can it be assimilated in any 
way whatever with the act by which a subject determines an 
object. 

Still speaking very roughly, faith appears as the act by which 
a thought, which denies itself as fixed and existing subject, re- 
constructs itself as (willed and created) subject by participation 
in God (who seems to be defined as the mysterious medium of 
this re-creation). 

This is very obscure and the heavy task of working it out 
still lies ahead. But the first point consists in finding out how the 
complex act that is faith (which for us has taken the place of the 
objective demonstration of a divine existence or essence) can be 
regarded as bound up with the cogito. The question comes back 
to this: how can the cogito surpass itself? It is clear that the 
individuality that is realised in faith must be beyond the purely 
abstract universality of the J think, it must comprehend it and 
surpass it. 

We know already that there can be no question of discovering 
a principle of interior necessity by which the cogito can surpass 
itself. We are in the order of freedom, that is to say, in the 
order of that which is capable of not being. I must repeat that were 
faith converted into certitude it would be denied as faith, and 


41 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


all the determinations I have given to it so far would lose their 
meaning. But how are we to escape from the realm of the arbitrary? 
For thought is extremely distrustful of what is capable of not 
being. Note, however, that the cogito itself does not escape from 
this contingency. The reflection of thought upon itself may well 
appear to itself as necessary, but for all that it is impossible to 
discover an internal link that allows us to account for the passage 
from pure physical becoming to the act in which thought is 
created by thinking itself. The universality appertaining to the 
I think is not even—we must take care here—the purely hypo- 
thetical universality that appertains to a law. It is unconditional. 
And unconditionality is the mark of freedom. Thus we have a 
reassuring example—we should keep reminding ourselves of it— 
of the possibility of thinking a free act which is nevertheless not 
arbitrary (the appearance of arbitrariness only arises when abstract 
thought claims to deduce the free from the necessary and the un- 
conditional from the derivative, because in the necessary and the 
derivative it takes its point of departure). 

So even if we limit ourselves to the cogito we are for all 
that in the metaphysical order, that is to say the order of free- 
dom (I would be inclined to say that contingency is freedom 
regarded from the point of view of the object). 

On what conditions can the cogito transcend itself? And, 
first and foremost, what makes the act of transcendence possible 
(in general, i. independently of its particular determinations)? 

Light can be thrown on this question, I think, by some further 
considerations. We have seen that the J think could be converted 
into a form, and we have denied the legitimacy of this conversion. 
But even the fact of the possibility of this conversion is instructive 
(nothing informs us better about truth than error: or rather the 
conditions that make error possible must be closely linked with 
the conditions which make truth possible; and the same holds for 
good and evil). The conversion was only possible through the 
medium which confronted the J think with the empirical material 
and hence in some way interpreted their relation. As a result the 
- cogito was already in some fashion transcended. But the two terms 
were only brought together in a quite superficial way which left the 
question of how they could co-exist untouched. Between the 
empirical content which is the datum given to the J think—and 


42 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


by reflection on which the J think is constituted—and the J think 
itself, no relation is thinkable. And in this way it seems that the 
thought that reflects the cogito is driven on to the rocks of Spir’s 
radical dualism which places an intelligible nature and an empirical 
(irrational) nature in absolute opposition to one another (at least 
inasmuch as it is consequent). Can such a dualism be avoided, 
and if so on what conditions? Pure formalism, which we have 
_ already rejected, has the extremely serious defect of being unable 
to account for the act that makes it possible, for the act by which 
the conversion of the cogito into form is operated—and indirectly 
for the cogito itself. Can we now remain content with a philo- 
sophy that denies the possibility of transcending the cogito, and 
is satisfied with positing it as irreducible to any empirical content 
whatsoever? We should observe, I think, that, though what is 
posited here does not imply a contradiction, it cannot be regarded 
as satisfactory. What relation can [| establish between myself as 
thinking, and myself as empirical, (that is to say, in so far as 
I enfold the universe, for between me and the world there are 
infinitely complex relations in which, in last analysis, all reality 
is involved)? Can I deny that there is a relation? Or can I try to 
derive the thinking ego from the empirical ego? This last solution, 
as we already know, is not acceptable. It takes on a semblance of 
coherence only by substituting for the act of J think a complex 
psychism with which this act (inasmuch as it is intelligible and 
unverifiable) cannot and should not be confused. To be possible, 
the truth of the relation that we are claiming to establish requires 
the cogito itself, and the problem consists in integrating the 
cogito into an empirical synthesis. And as I see things this is 
enough to refute any empiricism whatsoever. Moreover, we know 
that thought cannot negate itself for the benefit of the immediate 
consciousness. To that extent we seem to be cornered in a dualism. 
But here one observation is imperative. If we deny that there is a 
truth in the relation of the cogito to the empirical ego, do we not 
in some way re-establish that truth? By positing the truth of the 
dualism do we not thereby reconstitute the very thing we claimed 
we are denying? Does not the dualism lead us to this dilemma: 
either we genuinely think two realities, which yet inasmuch as 
they are realities must have some common measure and so partake 
in an intelligible whole, or else we posit one of these realities as 


43 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


pure negation (and hence self-negating even as dualism)—unless 
we posit the transcendent possibility of a synthesis of that which 
for us is dialectical, which amounts to thinking a truth of this 
relation while denying ourselves the right to think it. 

From this we would have to conclude that thought must posit 
the relation of the J think to the empirical order as unverifiable; 
that is, it must affirm the absolute impossibility of an objective 
definition (even, in fact above all a dualistic one) of such a relation. 
Of course there is still Fichte’s solution, consisting in the deduc- 
tion of the empirical from the J think; but unfortunately that 
deduction seems to imply the reduction of the contingent to the 
rational (which, as we have seen, is absurd, for thought cannot 
affirm itself and constitute itself save by the movement by which it 
transcends an existing datum which must needs appear to it as 
contingent). We must note, furthermore, that the deduction 
necessarily stops at the point at which empirical individuality— 
the only individuality that matters here—is posited. If, then, the 
relation of the cogito to the empirical ego is unverifiable (that is 
to say, not susceptible of truth), we posit at least the possibility 
of faith. It might possibly be maintained that the transition 
from absolute indetermination to the act of faith constitutes a 
saltus mortalis. The only truth in this observation is that the 
transition must be regarded as entirely free. To speak of the 
transition as arbitrary is to treat faith as a hypothesis grafted with- 
out justification on to a state of doubt and objective indetermina- 
tion. Now faith is nothing of the kind. Faith is not a hypothesis 
—it is essential to grasp that point. Faith is the act by which the 
mind fills the void between the thinking ego and the empirical 
ego by affirming that they are linked transcendentally; or, rather, 
faith is the act by which the mind is made, the mind—i.e. the 
mind as a living and active reality, the mind as distinct from the 
thinking subject. Doubtless the dissociation of these various 
moments can and must seem arbitrary. It is only by abstract 
analysis that we can recognise them, single them out and give 
them names. 

But how are we to comprehend the transcendent unity of the 
thinking ego and of the empirical ego that the mind affirms so as 
to be mind? The unity is in function of the freedom that wills it. 
Here we return to what we have already said regarding non- 


44 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


existence, and it is here that the demonstration we then sketched 
out belongs. Now the transcendental unity is capable of appearing 
as non-arbitrary, as valid, but only as valid for the mind, that is 
for thought which has transcended itself, for the being that wills 
to be mind. In this way we can at last conceive the relation of 
human freedom to divine freedom which is the central mystery of 
_ the Christian religion; and we can finally grasp how the individu- 

ality that faith requires as its pivot is created. I would be prepared 
to say that by the act of faith that posits the non-contingence of 
the empirical ego (and hence of the whole world) the mind 
actualises that principle of freedom which in the cogito was still 
only virtual and even ran the risk of being converted into a pure 
form of necessity. 

It seems to me that, however general they are, these first 
indications already give us a glimpse of the real relation between 
science and religion. While science is the concern of the abstract 
ego, the cogito, and as a result reposes on the act of a freedom 
which has not yet reached the stage of being for itself, religion 
is based on the very mind itself, that is to say on the indivi- 
dualised thought which has posited an intimate relationship 
between itself (as abstract) and its integral experience, by means 
of the act of faith. Through faith I affirm a transcendental foun- 
dation for the union of the world and of my thought, I refuse to 
_ think myself as purely abstract, as an intelligible form hovering 
over a world which is what it may be, and in which necessity 
is only the reverse of contingency. Thus the order of science is 
relative to faith in the measure in which the / think is subordinated 
to the J delieve—where abstract thought (the thinking subject) 
is subordinated to the mind. 

But is this not ambiguous? Are we not now confronted 
with two alternatives: either this transcendent truth is that of a 
cause, or else it is so indeterminate that it serves no purpose. 
(In the first instance it remains objective and has no validity.) 
But that objection implies an absolute misunderstanding. We are 
not concerned with explanations, there is no question of hypo- 
thesis. The freedom realised in the act of faith is no longer the 
virtual freedom of the cogito which is suppressed in its object, 
it is actual freedom, freedom for its own sake. The only thinkable 
link between God and the world is established in faith and by 


45 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


faith, that is to say it resides in the perpetual mediation of the 
believer. 

But are we not making divine reality dependent on the act that 
thinks it? Is not God consumed in, the subjective affirmations that 
seem to beget him? This is important and must be emphasised. 
The mind, as we have said, is only created as mind by faith in 
God. But this faith in God involves the affirmation that it is itself 
conditioned by God, that is to say, the affirmation of the divine 
fatherhood. Which means that the mind posits God as the positer. 
Can this be called pure illusion, a kind of phenomenal game of 
reflection, which in reality comes back to the positing of the mind 
by itself? But it would be necessary to begin by asking whether, 
in the order of mind, the distinction between appearance and 
reality can continue to subsist. I think it is possible to show— 
I have done it elsewhere, though from a rather different stand- 
point—that that distinction is entirely relative to the movement 
of thought. The distinction is suppressed in the act of faith which 
restores to the world its reality. By that act, in fact, abstract 
thought grasps itself as moment and brands with invalidity the 
condemnations it brought to bear on things when it took itself 
as indication of reality. In the kingdom of heaven there is no 
room for illusion and error, and I would be tempted to say 
(perhaps this needs to be verified) that the rationalist criticisms 
that are made against thaumaturgy are both well founded (in 
the sense that from the standpoint of rational thought a miracle 
is impossible), and also absolutely pointless because they come 
from outside and are external to what they bear on (by the very 
fact that they are criticisms) and because they imply the dualism 
that is suppressed when the order of faith and of the miraculous 
is posited. It follows that the problem of the miraculous must be 
resolved in a negative way for anyone who is not a saint. The 
possibility of the miraculous is capable of becoming apparent 
to whoever conceives the distinction between the two orders, 
but possibility is superseded by reality for the saint who ac- 
complishes the miracle, and for those whom he enables to parti- 
cipate in the grace that has touched him. 

But the saint is only really for himself. For anyone who 
reflects on sanctity, by an analytical necessity sanctity is sup- 
pressed. In this sense we can say, I think, that the saint can only 


46 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


be the object of a cult—cult being defined here as the partici- 
pation of a mind in another mind which it does not accept as an 
object or datum. It must be emphasised that the science of 
religions discovers nothing, for its very definition involves the 
suppression of its object. A cult some humble person devotes 
to a saint of whom he knows nothing and of whom, doubtless, 
he forms an image which is gross and inexact historically, has 
- more éeing than the volumes piled up by men of learning so as to 
reduce the saint to normal proportions or even to establish that 
he never existed. Yet here a difficulty arises, which we shall 
certainly come across in a more general form. Does not the 
religious cult purport to depend on objective affirmations? Are 
not the miracles posited to be facts? Yet in the order of facts and 
objective affirmations there is evidently room for illusion and 
error, and hence the possibility of illusion and of error seems 
to be introduced into the heart of religion. Here we come up 
against the question of the measure in which historical elements 
may intervene in the field of religion. 

There can be no question that in so far as it is claimed that 
the affirmations of the religious consciousness are supported by 
historical certainties their meaning is profoundly changed and 
they run the risk of being swept away in the maelstrom that 
inevitably carries such certainties away. In so far as those certain- 
_ ties are presented as objective they have no characteristic by which 
they can escape investigation, that is, dissolution; and in so far 
as they are affirmations of a cultural kind they are not objective. 
But can we agree that the historical factor should be excluded 
entirely from religion? I think that would be a dangerous mistake. 
For it implies that very dissociation of empirical from rational 
elements which, as we have already seen, involves the absolute 
negation of religion (specifically considered). But does this not 
lead us, by a roundabout way, back to the subjectivism that we 
have already denounced? If, independently of the empirical or 
historical reality possessed by its object, worship seems to me to 
justify itself, is it not because the object does not really matter, 
because the essence of worship resides in the act itself, because 
the act, in opposition to the illusions of appearance, has a truth 
in itself (in appearance the act is subordinated to the object, in 
reality the object is only the purely contingent expression of 


47 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


the act)? This difficulty is very serious. It looks as if we must 
either re-establish the dualism, or else posit for the object an 
ambiguous reality which is non-empirical. Clearly we cannot 
affirm dogmatically that the origins of any particular devotion 
invariably provide it with a justification. Such an affirmation 
would lack any valid guarantee. 

This is the worst difficulty I have come across so far. For it 
turns on conciliating the fact that in the realm of religion there 
are objective affirmations—and hence the danger of reintroducing 
the dualism of appearance and reality—and of the fact that by 
its very nature the realm of religion excludes any such dualism. 
The difficulty is that if we suppress the element of objectivity 
we re-establish the dualism absolutely. Just as it may well be that 
the incorruptible soul is only revealed when it is incarnate in a 
corruptible body, so it looks as though religion can only become 
reality when it is manifested in affirmations that preserve their 
relation with history and thereby involve seeds of death. But I 
can see a solution. For the saint, for whom all is actual, and with 
regard to whom all is ordered, (Christ posited as Idea), the his- 
torical basis is not necessary. Eternity is embodied with the actual, 
it is actual. Whereas for someone who only participates in sanctity 
in a purely empirical way, history and time become important, 
bringing with them that relation to an objective element which 
has within it the seeds of death. In other words, the difficulty 
would be resolved for anyone who could see that the state of 
affairs that provokes it is itself relative to a moment which cannot 
at any level be viewed as ultimate in the development of the reli-_ 
gious consciousness (a development posited by thought as soon 
as it conceives a saint). In the measure in which the dualism of 
appearance and reality is not entirely overcome (and it can only 
be absolutely overcome in the saint, the absolute mediator) it is 
natural and necessary that the non-eliminatable element of ob- 
jectivity should survive—the existentially posited element that 
is the defect of the ordinary believer’s religion. The real believer 
has no need to touch (i.e. to know) in order to believe. As long 
as devotion still implies objective affirmations we have a failure 
to realise absolute religion—the religion of the saint for whom 
all is pure actuality, all is revelation, for whom, in a word, sub- 
jectivism has no meaning and is confounded with an objectivism 


48 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


of the most artless kind—because ideality is entirely absorbed in 
spirituality. 


January 31st 


I feel the need to return more methodically to the series of 
questions I only touched on yesterday, for it is important to 
_visualise them clearly. The transition from the act of faith to 
a historical religion is far from clear to me. It means raising 
the question of the relation of religious philosophy to the historic 
religions. We are not concerned with constructing the historical 
religions. The Hegelian idea of a parallelism between dialectics 
and history is one better entirely rejected. At all events it implies 
a metaphysical postulate that I do not admit. But that being so it 
appears that religious philosophy must either construct a rational 
religion without relation to history, or else receive its historical 
material from outside. The first solution has already been re- 
jected. The idea of a rational religion excluding all relation to 
history is the very negation of the act by which the mind wills 
and creates itself. But what then? The historical material we are 
obliged to adopt seems incapable of adjustment to the framework 
of reflection save by a procedure that is arbitrary and purely 
superficial. Beyond question this second solution is even more 
unacceptable than the first. Furthermore it implies the very 
_ dualism of history and reflection that the act of faith, when realised, 
negates. But how are we to establish a hierarchy in the religions 
that exist? If it is objective such a hierarchy can have no meta- 
physical value; it must needs be based on a principle whose very 
essence is extra-religious. At the threshold of the act by which 
a mind adopts a historical religion the philosopher’s task is over. 
But in this way are we not ending up at a new kind of historico- 
religious formalism which posits the necessity of some sort of 
historical landmark? Are we not recreating that very dualism of 
matter and form which we seemed obliged to exclude from the 
realm of religious thought? On what does this apparently in- 
surmountable difficulty depend? Strictly speaking it seems to me 
to depend on the fact that, when pushed to its furthest extent, 
reflection on religion negates itself. Such reflection only achieves 
the entire suppression of the dualism of matter and form when 
it is itself suppressed and is converted into belief. For reflection 


c 49 


J METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


is inseparable from some kind of dualism. The formalism we have 
now attained, however transcendent, is still formalism. Only in 
so far as reflection achieves a grasp of the intimate solidarity that 
exists between itself and formalism in general can it manage to 
recognise the relativity of this attitude, to think of itself as sup- 
pressed, and to pass over to faith. In this sense faith appears as re- 
flection that has reflected itself, and as a result has been negated. 
The mode of thinking proper to philosophy is the only one that 
possesses in itself a sufficiently active and sufficiently conscious 
principle of reflection and negation to be capable of suppressing 
itself. The plurality of religions only seems existent to reflective 
thought when it has not yet been elevated to the level of faith— 
when faith still remains an exterior object for it. From the stand- 
point of faith there is only one religion and there can only be one. 

Here an objection forces itself on us. It consists in saying 
that such a unique and absolutely individualised belief appears to a 
knowing subject as function of a whole series of social and his- 
torical conditions by which it is completely determined. But this 
point of view, as we have already seen, is relative. ‘The critique of 
absolute knowledge as I have outlined it elsewhere allows us to 
grasp that, as the plane of scientific knowledge is a subordinate 
plane, it is impossible to maintain that the historian of belief can 
transcend the belief that he studies (because he denies it). 

So genuine belief appears to reflective thought as that which 
reflective thought turns into when it is negated. Here I think I 
have just given a definition of grace. For inasmuch as such self- 
negation is an object of reflection it is destroyed, that is to say 
reflection is reborn from its own ashes. The genuine negation of 
reflection seems possible only by the intervention of a transcen- 
dent power. Conversion is only thinkable by the intervention of 
grace. But is conversion thinkable? From the point we have 
reached it is clear that there can be no question of practical 
observation and confirmation. Conversion does not create con- 
version, or rather, if it does so, it is only by purely internal 
action and not because it is example observed (in the sense in 
which the observation of a physical fact begets belief in the fact). 


February 1st 
But what I have said must be subordinated to the question of 
50 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


whether conversion is really thinkable (other than as a pure em- 
pirical datum which, as we know, is nothing). If conversion is 
thinkable it must be something that is in no way a datum given by 
the fact that it is thought. 


February 2nd 


_ What reasons can we have for thinking something of a given 
thing? Notice that the hiatus between the Gedachtsein and the 
Gegebensein occurs equally for all that goes to make a nature, for 
all that is empirical. So may not what we have called grace be 
capable of reduction to the totality of the practical conditions, 
of the favourable conditions, that determine a conversion? Were 
we to admit this, either we would have to deny that conversion 
creates a new intelligibility, or else we would have to realise that 
intelligibility, interpret it psychologically and render it dependent 
on the factual conditions we imagined we had discovered. The 
latter solution seems to me purely verbal. An order is not defined 
in function of psychological conditions. So we must purely and 
simply deny that conversion creates a new intelligibility, and see 
mere appearance there—in other words, for theillusion undergone 
by the believer we must substitute the real intellection of the 
psychologist for whom the illusion is object. Has such a sub- 
stitution any value or even any meaning whatsoever? It implies 
the negation of all that we have taken so much trouble to establish, 
it supposes that the dualism of appearance and reality is capable 
of a meaning in the order of faith, or else—which comes to the 
same thing—it posits that the thinking subject in general is 
transcendent in relation to the real individuality who is the 
subject of faith. Indeed it is based on an utter confusion of cate- 
gories. To deny the reality of conversion is almost equivalent to 
denying the validity of the description someone makes of what 
he sees, hears or imagines, and substituting instead a description 
of his cerebral condition. But for all that it must be admitted that 
if we posit this a serious difficulty arises. Does not the argument 
prove too much? From this standpoint could we not claim that 
all visions (even hallucinations) are transcendent in relation to 
the psychological explanation we claim to give of them? How, 
in a word, can we establish a discrimination in the heart of ex- 
periences without recourse to objective criteria, criteria analogous 


51 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


to those we would use in demonstrating the intervention of some 
kind of cause? It seems as though either we are bound to remain 
forever in the realm of objective psychologism, or else we are 
obliged to deny it on all counts—which would result in a sort 
of untenable mysticism; or—third alternative—that we must 
make a discrimination the basis of which we cannot see. Here as 
previously it is easy to see the empirical function that could 
appertain to the Church. Just as the Church guards the deposit 
of history, so it claims to be alone competent in the matter of 
discrimination. In both it appears as the incarnation of religious 
objectivity—hence its grandeur and at the same time its weakness. 
But this is no philosophical solution. The philosophical question 
concerns the criteria that can be recognised as valid. And, more- 
over, what is a criterion of value in these matters? We know 
(cf. as I have already said) that it can neither be strict moral 
efficacity, nor evidence conceived in an objective sense, nor in 
general any of the criteria that can be used in the theoretical order. 
As the simplest reflection shows the problem cannot even be stated 
in elementary criteriological terms. There can be no question of 
discerning amongst possible causes, for we already know that 
divine action cannot be thought as a cause amongst other causes, 
and it is therefore absurd to ask what are the signs by which we 
can recognise whether it is a given cause and not some other 
that has operated in a particular case. But then are we not victims 
of the superficial subjectivism that posits the transcendental 
reality of all experience as experience? For now we seem to be 
forced to a choice between metaphysical phenomenalism of that 
type and a doctrine of objectivity whose impossibility we have 
just seen. But in reality this superficial subjectivism is nothing or 
rather it is an imperfect realism; for under the cloak of subjectivity 
it posits no more than an incompletely thought-out objectivity, 
it does no more than realise experience improperly. Now the fact 
that such realism is impossible has been established by all the 
foregoing inquiries. Only if we set all realism aside can we think 
the act of faith. There is not a faith of x and another of y. There is 
only faith. The act of faith is indivisible. The individuality realised 
in and through it is not the immediate and atomic individuality 
which overcame and negated itself in the J think, it is the indivi- 
duality that has transcended the J think and has recovered pos- 


52 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


session of itself in a creative synthesis. The faith of others is not 
quite absolutely for me. I think it possible to establish that a 
universal religion or, more simply, a religion, can only be founded 
on the kind of preliminary solipsism (elsewhere I have called it 
practical monadism) by which an individuality is created. And 
hence the problem of grace can only be posited in infinitely more 
_ complex terms, those I began to suggest the day before yesterday, 
terms that transcend all psychology. I would like to make those 
terms more definite. 

Note that the question of how conversion can be regarded as 
thinkable has not yet been answered. We came up against a con- 
tradiction which was, at least seemingly, insoluble, namely that 
when reflection negates itself it remains its own object, and hence 
the free act does not achieve real self-realisation. If it can be 
thought as realised, that is only because of the intervention of 
grace. But granted that an appeal to an objective and external 
causality could only be an absolutely sterile subterfuge—what 
does this mean? How can we think grace? 

It seems to me that I have not yet at my disposal a method that 
allows me to throw adequate light on the problem. Hence I can 
only proceed in a stumbling and provisional way. Grace implies 
the absolute irreducibility of the strictly religious mode of intel- 
ligibility in relation to all objective intelligibility, and in conse- 
quence it also implies an absolutely discontinuous transition from 
the cogito to real individuality. In this way, it seems to me, we 
can understand the gulf that still subsists between the act of faith, 
as I defined it earlier, and grace as it presents itself to us now. 
The act of faith is indeed reflection negating itself (in that it denies 
the dualism between itself and the empirical world), but in so far 
as the negation of reflection is itself converted into an object of 
reflection, the act of faith appears to it as a sort of transcendental 
auto-suggestion—and inasmuch as reflection triumphs in its effort 
at self-negation, it seems condemned to see grace as the objecti- 
vised product of this effort considered as illusory, as the arbitrary 
suppression of the re-establishment of possession over itself, by 
which it has converted the negation of itself into an object. I 
confess I do not find it difficult to think of reflection’s return on 
itself in terms of a relapse; the act by which I think it as such is 
necessarily posited as transcendent in relation to the return—but 


53 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


for all that the act itself is in danger of becoming an object again, 
and so on. 

The question, then, is how grace can be thought as real, how 
thought can manage to condemn as invalid the act by which it 
can claim to see grace as the illusory and fixed expression of an 
activity that is unable to be for itself. Even before this question 
there arises the question of what ‘real’ means here—and whether 
we are not re-establishing beyond grace some kind of norm to 
which we could claim to reduce it. And going even further— 
we need to know whether this reduction is not contradictory. 
Now here the answer is simple. To speak of reality in connection 
with grace is to say nothing whatever, it is to posit irreducibility 
in function of a system of reduction and be involved in a contra- 
diction in terms. In that way the further questions immediately 
undergo a complete transformation. For we have to say that the 
question of reality cannot be posited regarding grace, for grace 
lies outside the categories of modality. Just as from divine non- 
existence we can deduce the validity of the affirmation of the 
divine, so here, and in a similar way, grace is posited as beyond the 
categories, because a negation would restore it to a plane from 
which it has been excluded. 


February 3rd 


But is this more than mere sophism? For on what plane are we 
affirming the reality of this power? If it is on the plane of the real 
in a modal sense, the reasoning seems to be vicious. If it is outside 
reality in the modal sense the reasoning may be regarded as valid 
and even as analytical, but it is sterile.t 

I would argue as follows. If conversion is possible, this can 
only be by the intervention of grace. But inversely we should be 
able to establish the possibility of conversion had we a means of 
showing that grace is posited when conversion is thought. 
Though this last point at one time seemed agreed, now it looks 
as though it is doubtful. The logical regression has not yet led 
us to the point of evidence at which a new progression can begin. 
All that we have seen is that there is a sense in which the question 


1 Since I wrote the above I have defined my method by saying that it starts out from the 
superficial positing of a problem, so as to derive a negative conclusion from it which 
emphasises the new terms that furnish the elements for positing it anew (this time as 
real); and this, in its turn, makes possible a positive solution, 


34 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


of grace is absolutely incapable of being posited. It is absurd to 
ask whether it is legitimate to think grace, for grace, by definition, 
falls outside the norms of reflection. From this point of view we 
can say that grace is the absolute fact. Do we end up, then, with 
a sort of transcendental empiricism which defines grace exclusively 
in function of an experience (which in itself is incapable of being 
objectivised)? That, put in a phrase, would mean that there is no 

way of thinking grace, that strictly speaking grace is not even 
possible, that it can only be conceived in function of a particular 
experience which can only be actual (it cannot be in any way 
represented to anyone who has not received it). But here I see 
a grave ambiguity. For to posit grace in this way still means to 
think it. Everything depends on whether the act by which it is 
thought remains explicit, or whether we extend the inconsequence 
so as to set it aside (which would amount to falling back once 
more into the philosophy of pure immediacy). Let us see if we 
can adopt the first way. As the question of legitimacy has no 
meaning if applied to grace, it is plain that our business does not 
lie in knowing whether grace can be used as an explanation of the 
transition from my (actual) given experience to another experience 
which is merely conceived. Hence we at least admit the possibility 
of a naturalistic or psychological explanation which can account 
for the transition. 

On the other hand I cannot conceive any direct relation be- 
tween what I am and grace. Strictly speaking, what I am capable 
of thinking is a subsequently established relation beginning with 
the new experience which itself can only be defined in function 
of grace, in function of the affirmation regarding grace. But in 
that case there is reciprocity between grace and the experience 
which we affirm to be made possible by grace, it looks as if we 
have to abandon all hope of transition from the idea (?) of grace 
to the idea of conversion. ““This”, it may be said, “is a pseudo- 
problem, for conversion is only thought because experience shows 
us examples of it; it is impossible to posit at this point a problem 
that is strictly critical. For we are in the realm of the pure em- 
pirical”. This way of looking at things may be very prudent, but 
it does not seem to’me justifiable. We are’not concerned here with 
knowing what the conditions are under which the idea of con- 
version may be presented to a mind. Such are evidently mere 


°F) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


conditions of fact; conditions that are entirely contingent. We 
are concerned here with knowing under what conditions I can 
think myself as converted (let us not forget that we have passed 
beyond objectivity and plurality). Inasmuch as I am a thinking 
subject and inasmuch as I remain external to myself I can easily 
imagine objective reasons for my conversion; but inasmuch as I 
overcome the dualism of the thinking subject and the empirical 
ego, conversion appears to me to be an insoluble problem—I can 
think only of its being resolved by grace, but on the other hand 
I know that grace cannot be thought as objective cause, that 
it can only be affirmed after conversion; to think of grace objec- 
tively is to deny it absolutely and for certain. This 1s as much as to 
say that conversion cannot really be thought as yet to come (here the 
word ‘really’ means by oneself as individual, as thinking subject 
transcended). At this point, though now on an infinitely higher 
plane, I think we come once again upon the problem of time, and 
approach the idea of an absolute present. 


February 4th 


I would like to-attempt to state precisely what I only sketched 
yesterday. First of all, doubtless, there is a relation between the 
fact of surpassing the categories of modality and the fact of posit- 
ing an absolute present, i.e. of denying the homogeneity (and 
hence the reality) of time. I think we need to define this relation 
exactly. 

I was led to say that we cannot attribute any of the known 
forms of modality to grace when I reflected that the question of 
whether or not it is legitimate to think grace is meaningless, 
because it supposes that grace can be thought as a mode of ex- 
planation. From this viewpoint, whether we affirm or deny grace, 
we think it as objective (as objectively true or false), and hence, 
at least in a negative way, we define what I call absolute freedom 
(that which is transcendent in relation to the categories of 
modality). Thus defined, absolute freedom does not belong to 
the order of what can be posited (in the sense that the objectively 
possible is only the existant as problematically posited); it does 
not belong to the order of the existential (cf. my whole{criticism 
of existence—moreover the objective determination of that which 
exists is based on internal necessity), it does not belong to the 


56 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


order of what must be posited, for all necessity is defined in 
function of an explanation or of an integral experience of what is 
given. It can be described as the form of the judgment of existence 
least ill-adapted to the act that posits it—provided that the 
existential is thought independently of an objective substratum 
(which, doubtless, is contradictory). 
| So we cannot really think grace. Or rather we can only think 
it as unthinkable (inasmuch as we associate the act of thinking 
with the idea of an objective content). From the standpoint of the 
I think, of the thinking subject, grace must be rejected out of hand. 
But in the measure in which the / think is capable of transcending 
itself, and of becoming faith, at least a distant communication 
seems possible. As we have said, to think grace is to deny it. 
It remains to be seen whether that negation converts itself into 
an affirmation. In other words we have to ask ourselves whether 
the act of faith itself does not involve positing grace; and whether 
the negation of grace is not equivalent to the self-suppression 
of faith, that is to say to the suicide of a freedom which can only 
be negated when it is exercised. Divine transcendence would be 
affirmed by the very act in which the freedom of the creature is 
realised. Is that the case? 

It is clear that, as I have conceived it, the act of faith implies 
positing God as independent of the act that posits him. In that 
sense the act of faith enfolds another act by which thought pro- 
hibits itself from reflecting the free act. What does this suppose? 
What if it be said that such a prohibition is unjustified? Obviously 
this would re-establish, beyond the act of faith, a world of truths 
that the act of faith transcended when it was constituted. What if 
we said that in this way thought posits itself as trans-subjective, 
that is, that the act of faith is the very act by which God thinks 
himself? But that implies a metaphysical transposition of the 
cogito which seems to me illegitimate. It remains that faith posits 
transcendence in the strictest sense; i.e. grace, i.e. a radically 
independent power (and in my view this is the foundation of 
what can be called the divine personality). But does this not 
involve us in thinking a possible (or necessary) relationship 
between ourselves and that power? We are obliged by all we have 
said to answer that it does not, that is, we are obliged to deny the 
legitimacy of any kind of modal qualification of such a relation. 


ct 57 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


I can say no more than that between God and me there is the 
relation of one freedom with another. That relation is involved in 
the act of faith—as affirmation. In other words, between God and 
me there must be a relation of the kind that love establishes 
between lovers. 


February 5th 


And so, side by side with faith we posit love. I have said elsewhere 
that love is the condition of faith, and in a sense this is true. But 
it is only one aspect. I believe that in reality love and faith 
cannot be dissociated. When faith ceases to be love it congeals 
into objective belief in a power that is conceived more or less 
physically. And love which is not faith (which does not posit the 
transcendence of the God that is loved) is only a sort of abstract 
game. Just as the divine reality corresponds to faith (the former 
can only be thought in function of the latter) so divine perfection 
corresponds to love. And the union of reality and perfection in 
God, far from needing to be understood in the old intellectualist 
sense (ens realissimum), can only be grasped in function of faith 
and of the union of faith and love that I have just emphasised. 
I cease to believe in God the moment I cease to love him; an 
imperfect God cannot be real. 

This, it may be said, is pure phenomenalism. Does it not 
resolve the divine reality into the purely phenomenological 
‘becoming’ of the consciousness that thinks it? We know that, 
to thought, faith is presented as that which thought only trans- 
cends in an illusory and provisional way. Faith, in so far as it is 
not really thought, seems no more than a game of subjective 
appearances. In other words, in the name of faith as ideally con- 
ceived, thought must see the gulf that separates belief that is 
still purely intellectual from sanctity (absolute belief); and it 
must recognise the absolute impossibility of maintaining the 
validity—only possible at the lower stages of speculation—of 
the dualism of appearance and reality. 

Hence we are once again up against the question of grace. 
For grace is presented to thought as the order in which the dual- 
ism no longer occurs. The basis of the separation between God 
and the creature seems to reside in the act by which the creature 
posits, beyond faith, an ideal knowledge capable of disentangling 


58 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the truth of faith. On the other hand we have seen that grace can 
only be thought as unthinkable, that is, as the divine suppression 
of that act. But does not this oblige us to convert grace into a 
sort of truth of faith, into a sort of mysterious, ideally posited 
landmark by which we can measure the distance that still separates 
us from our goal? It is only too plain that if we so conceive grace 
we are abandoning all that we have previously posited. We must 
go back to what was said earlier, namely that grace cannot be 
thought as Idea without being denied. The ideal convergence 
which is characteristic of knowledge cannot apply in the order 
of faith. To think grace as required, as postulated by the act of 
faith seems inevitably to posit grace as a sort of ideal; and con- 
sequently it means denying that very divine freedom on which 
alone it can be based. Ought we then to say that we have the 
idea of grace within us, but that that is a contingent psychological 
fact, and the idea is necessarily dissolved by dialectics? But, as we 
have already seen, human freedom is veritably for itself only in 
the measure in which it is suppressed when it thinks divine 
freedom, when it renounces seeing anything in itself save the 
anticipation of an action which could not emanate from itself. 
If it aims to be more it collapses, and becomes the illusory game 
of a reflection that seeks for self-forgetfulness in the womb of 
its non-activity, busied with limiting itself to independent pro- 
ducts whose origin it insists on ignoring. 

Here the relation between my views and the philosophy of 
Fichte appears clearly—and also the enormous difference between 
them. 

Grace indeed remains the postulate that is transcendent and 
incapable of being objectivised—of the act of faith. I would 
express this in another way by saying that by the act of faith 1 
posit between God and myself a relation that completely eludes 
the categories of my thought (I think it as unthinkable but as 
absolutely involved in the act of faith). 


February 6th 
Thanks to a conversation I had yesterday with A—— I think I 


now understand. 
Grace, I said, must be thought as unthinkable. That must be 


made explicit. There is always an advantage in making things 
39 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


explicit, anyway we gain nothing by not making them explicit. 
But—and this will reveal results—the transcendence of grace 
thus thought as unthinkable remains a function of the stage of 
reflection. A relationship of tension in some way subsists between 
reflection that thinks the impossibility of negating itself abso- 
lutely and the transcendent (supermodal) order that would make 
this negation possible. In this sense to think grace as absolutely 
not relative to myself is to make it once again in some manner 
relative. In the measure in which I become aware of the depen- 
dence that subsists in spite of everything, I can say that “‘to affirm 
grace is to deny it.” In other words, for the saint, strictly speaking, 
there is no grace. If grace subsists for the convert it is inasmuch 
as he claims to explain to himself the transition from one stage to 
another, inasmuch, that is, as he identifies himself in some way 
with what he was before his conversion. So grace remains as 
function of a development in which a discontinuity has survived. 
As I have already said, it is defined less in relation to the con- 
version that has been achieved than in relation to a persisting 
dualism between the two modes of experience (of intelligibility), 
which are posited as discontinuous. 

In this sense I am absolutely incapable of positing the problem 
of my conversion; to admit the possibility of an action of grace is 
at least to construct a fictitious causality—and it is nothing more. 
If grace can only really be thought as unthinkable, I have no 
actual measuring rod for the spiritual condition in which I find 
myself. Grace is no more a norm than it is a cause. From the 
critical (or transcendental) standpoint it is only the act by which 
the convert posits the impossibility of reducing the new intel- 
ligibility to the previous modes of his reflection—though this 
act is only possible inasmuch as the modes in question still sub- 
sist in him. And hence at one and the same time we see the neces- 
sity of a dualistic basis for grace and also the relativity of grace. 
Grace is not the adequate expression of divine freedom, it is the 
expression that that freedom takes on for a thought dissociated — 
from itself. This dissociation from itself I shall henceforward 


call the Fall. 

February 7th 

I do not intend to go on with the foregoing reflections directly; 
60 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


I think that they will be cleared up little by little as we proceed. 
It is better to emphasise aspects more easily capable of direct 
elucidation. 

I would like now to take up the question of the relation of 
individualities to one another. I have already pointed out else- 
where why the monadistic solution seems to me unacceptable. 
Thought only has grounds for denying communication between 
individualities inasmuch as it posits itself as thinking (universal) 
subject; from that standpoint a plurality cannot in any way be 
conceived. This is as much as to say that if we still conceive that 
plurality is possible we have no reason to deny that interaction 
is likewise possible. Nevertheless, equivocations arise at this point 
owing to the chronic danger of confounding the empirical con- 
tent that must be transcended for the cogito to become possible, 
with the real individuality which is the act by which the mind is 
constituted when it makes actual the freedom immanent in the 
I think. Doubtless we can and must agree that the J think is pre- 
supposed by the empirical content, in that the latter is inserted 
into an experience (my experience) which implies the formal 
unity of the thought that constitutes it. But for all that the 
I think as form does no more than translate for reflection the 
I think that is act. Yet that is unimportant. What is plain is that 
communication between empirical contents must be regarded as 
possible. We must not forget that bodies are the site of existence; 
that is, of causality (or of Wechselwirkung—inter-action). Now 
if the J think becomes for itself, such communication seems pure 
illusion. Inasmuch as it is unverifiable, the cogito is posited as 
transcending any possible communication. But, I repeat, this can 
only be converted into a monadistic affirmation if we posit centres 
of thought, and that would be radically contradictory—as the 
plurality of the centres remains relative to the act that thinks 
the plurality. So at this third stage, at which individuality is 
constituted, we have to ask ourselves in what sense a plurality 
once again becomes possible. There are grounds for seeing an 
important signpost for the solution in the fact that individuality 
only is when it depends from an act of creation, a freedom dis- 
tinct from it—the absolute negation of solipsism is the pre- 
liminary condition of all spiritual life. And we already know that 
faith consists in, or is translated for intelligence into, the refusal 


61 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


to insert that negation into a solipsist system. From this stand- 
point, to adopt the words I put into the mouth of Clarisse,t God 
is that in which thoughts communicate, the real foundation of the 
communication between individualities. And if this by its nature 
is bound to seem fundamentally ambiguous, it is because, apart 
from the spiritual communication of love, there is another kind 
of purely mechanical communication which is like a parody of it 
(it appears as its symbol only to faith), which is due to the fact 
that individuality itself is only constituted from the starting point 
of that which exists. In so far as purely mechanical communication 
is established between individual thoughts the latter are negated 
and destroyed as individual, and they fall back into the order of 
pure existence, which by definition is indifferent in relation to all 
values whatsoever. There can be no real externality in the world 
of existence (the world of mechanical communication), because 
there is no interiority either (before one gives oneself one must 
belong to oneself). It is only from the moment at which individu- 
ality has an interior that it can think itself as really distinct from 
another individuality (and that love becomes possible). Now 
such an interior has itself to constitute itself or rather (as indivi- 
duality is not really a form), individuality is the very act by 
which the empirical content becomes interior. 

What I have elsewhere called real interiority is thus involved 
in every act of love—and, inversely, real individuality is essen- 
tially defined through love (or, strictly speaking, in aesthetic 
creation which makes possible the communication of individua- 
lities). Hence the meaning of my statement that love creates its 
object can be seen more clearly. It must not be understood in a 
superficially subjectivist and solipsist sense. The reality of the 
beloved one is essential to love—no (subjective) truth can trans- 
cend that reality. In this sense it is perhaps true to say that only 
love is real knowledge and that it is legitimate to associate love 
and adequate knowledge, in other words that only for love is 
the individuality of the beloved immune against disintegration 
and crumbling away, so to speak, into the dust of abstract 
elements. But it is only possible to maintain the reality of the 
beloved because love posits the beloved as transcending all ex- 
planation and all reduction. In this sense it is true to say that love 
1 In Le Palais de Sable. 


62 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


only addresses itselfto what is eternal, it immobilises the beloved 
above the world of genesis and vicissitude. And in that way love 
is the negation of knowledge, which can only ignore transcen- 
dence. Of course we need not conclude that love is necessarily 
blind, that to love means to exclude judgment. As soon as love 
is knowingly dissociated from knowledge it ceases to be love— 
from that moment love is no more (for itself) than an illusory 
and voluntarily idealised knowledge. Love needs to appear to 
itself as perfect knowledge, and in the measure in which it is now 
no longer permissible to dissociate being from appearances we 
can say that it zs perfect knowledge. For all that, reflection is 
bound to distinguish it from knowledge, and it cannot be defined 
save as being beyond all knowledge. Reflection (which, as I said 
elsewhere, cannot manage to get away from formalism entirely 
and from the dualism of appearance and reality) posits love as 
that which both experiences the need to justify itself and is itself 
alone capable of justifying. But how is it that love is not an illusion? 
If it requires justifications and if the justifications are purely 
fallacious, what is its value? To this we must answer that the 
dualism of love and of the principle of justification can only 
subsist in the finite order, that is, where reflection fails to negate 
itself completely—for God this dualism is suppressed, for God’s 
love does not meet with any truth that it is powerless to recognise. 
Is it possible to maintain that this is tantamount to seeing love 
as an illusion which, when bearing on creatures, is hindered by 
reality but when it bears on God, that is, on a pure construction, 
has full play and nothing to fear from experience? But we know 
already what to think of this kind of realism regarding the true. 
It would be child’s play to show that it implies a misunderstanding 
of all that has so far been established. We know full well that 
genuine love, even when directed towards human beings, does 
not allow itself to stop at knowledge; it affirms the value of its 
object beyond the merely relative and contingent order of merit 
and demerit—for love has partaken of divine mediation. 


February 9th 

I continue with the principal ideas I referred to the day before 

yesterday. Then I said that love appeared to itself as perfect know- 

ledge and that, as the dualism of appearance and reality only exists 
63 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


for reflection, in so far as reflection thinks itself as suppressed it 
needs to affirm that love is in reality what it is for itself. Only, 
of course, beyond reflection there is no longer a place for what 
can be called the true. And, in consequence, if the expression 
knowledge be applied to love it is misleading, for knowledge 
must be thought as referring to a truth. This will become clear 
later. Love, then, is not addressed to what the beloved is in him- 
self, if by what he is in himself we understand an essence. The 
contrary is the case. As I have already said, love bears on what is 
beyond essence, love is the act by which a thought, by thinking 
a freedom, is made free. In this sense love extends beyond any 
possible judgment, for judgment can only bear on essence— 
and love is the very negation of essence (in this sense it implies 
faith in the perpetual renewal of being itself, the belief that 
nothing ever is, that nothing ever can be irremediably lost). 
Doubtless, inasmuch as the lover is a thinking subject, and the 
beloved is the object for this subject, the lover cannot fail to 
judge, but he can only judge the beloved inasmuch as object, 
that is, in the beloved’s actions. Inasmuch as he loves (that is, 
inasmuch as he converts the object into subject) he must abso- 
lutely forgo making a judgment. The Thou shalt not judge of 
Christian morality must be viewed as one of the most important 
metaphysical formulae on earth. And it is in that sense that love 
necessarily places the being himself above all determinations of 
merit or lack of it. (The point, of course, needs developing.) 
But now two quite different questions come up before me. First 
of all, in what measure does the forgoing render a real communi- 
cation of minds thinkable? And secondly, if, as is clear, the way 
in which God has been thought makes a judgment on God impos- 
sible and radically illegitimate, has this impossibility the same 
sense as when we are dealing with creatures? I will begin by 
examining the second question. 

God cannot and must not be judged. For judgment is only 
possible regarding essence. That explains why every kind of 
theodicy must be condemned, because a theodicy necessarily 
implies a judgment, it is a judgment, a justification. Now God 
cannot be justified. The thought that justifies is the thought that 
has not yet been elevated to love and to the faith that claims to 
transcend the mind (belief). Theodicy is atheism (cf. Brun- 


64 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


schvicg). But does this imply (in any way whatever) that we 
should think God as being beyond good and evil? No expression is 
more ambiguous than that. Nature is not beyond good and evil, it 
falls short of good and evil, it is below the level at which we can 
speak of good and evil. Between good and evil there is a profound 
solidarity that Christian philosophy has been able to detect better 
than any other. So if we maintain the expression, we must be 
careful about the sense in which it can be regarded as legitimate. 
We have already seen that divine perfection is defined in function 
of love. But from that very fact we must conclude that divine 
perfection cannot really furnish the criterion of goodness that 
certain rationalist systems of morality would like it to. At this 
point the difficulty can be clearly seen. Either such perfection is 
identified with the good in general—which is ambiguous and 
dangerous—or else it seems to be reduced to a kind of beyond 
which is purely abstract and lacks all communication with our 
life. We must go into this further. We have already seen that God 
is nothing less than a notion, and in that sense he clearly cannot 
provide us with a criterion. Moreover, the true God is a living 
God—not merely the logical God required by some perfectionist 
moralities. To identify divine perfection with the good is an 
ambiguous step, because either we are only being tautologous or 
else we are claiming to base love on a previous (ethical) content 
and are vitiating profoundly what is essential in the act of love. 
It is here perhaps that we can discover the purely negative 
meaning we must attribute to the affirmation that God is beyond 
good and evil—that is, that there is no common measure between 
the statement concerning God and any kind of ethical judgment 
(and in consequence the statement can no longer serve as standard 
for such a judgment). But then are we not guilty of hypostatising 
this perfection into a sort of metaphysical solitude in which it is 
immobilised? We must grasp the very contrary, namely’that if it is 
possible to think a divine action it is on condition that God is 
concrete and personal (in the sense I defined earlier); and God 
can only be that if we are free to reject the interpretations pre- 
viously laid down. 

So it seems that between God and the believer we can trace 
relations strikingly analogous to those that unite creatures in the 
realm of love. 


65 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


But here we must avoid taking the wrong step. I think we 
must begin with the fact that it is impossible for the lover to 
judge the beloved, and ask about the conditions on which it holds. 
I have already said that the love which prohibits all reflection has 
been subject to divine mediation. In other words, in so far as the 
beloved is thought as participating in God he is situated in the 
order that transcends all judgment and is conceived as absolute 
value. Or rather (to exclude all psychologistic interpretations) 
the justification of the act which affirms the transcendence of the 
creature consists in that which postulates his divine filiation. 

The solidarity which is now apparent between the relativity of 
any ethical characterisation regarding the individual and the 
positing of the divine paternity, will perhaps help us to disen- 
tangle new problems and to see the question of “real communi- 
cation” in a new light. We should perhaps first of all ask ourselves 
about the exact relation between the act of faith as defined in the 
beginning and the participation of other minds in God. We have 
seen that with the act of faith I set myself free by thinking the 
divine freedom and by affirming, through love, other freedoms 
that depend from the divine freedom, (the basis of what I have 
called the communication of minds), I only participate in God 
(I am incapable of thinking myself as participating in God) 
inasmuch as I have faith in him. Such participation has no truth 
that is transcendent in relation to faith. But the participation of 
other minds in God is implied absolutely in the act of faith and 
as the faith of others cannot in any way have being for me we seem 
here to be obliged to effect some kind of dissociation between 
participation and faith—which brings serious difficulties in its 
train. Participation is here manifest as a fact. 


February 10th 


To return to the subject. By faith I affirm that God is the father 
of all men. On the other hand I can only think myself as partici- 
pating in God in so far as I have faith in him—in other words, 
such participation cannot and must not appear to me as a fact of 
which I can become aware or be unaware as the case may be. 
As regards others I am obliged to dissociate participation from 
faith—for the faith of others is nothing for me, it is in no manner 
thinkable. But inasmuch as by reflection I think myself as a simple 


66 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


unity amongst other unities, by a sort of inversion I reach the 
point of positing myself as participating in God in fact. I scarcely 
need to point out the illusion here. But for all that it is difficult 
to understand the dualism between the way in which I need to 
think my participation in God, and the way in which I conceive 
the participation of other minds. This point must be emphasised. 
First of all we must throw some light on the nature of the relations 
_ between participation and faith for myself. Obviously there is no 
strict sense in which I can make the divine transcendence depen- 
dent on the act of faith; yet an individual relation between them 
remains, in the sense that I dispossess myself of any right to 
affirm the divine transcendence in so far as I have no faith in it. 
In other words we must not only distinguish but even allow a 
radical opposition between the relation between faith and its 
object and the relation that exists between the perceiving subject 
and the object perceived. In one instance, under penalty of con- 
tradicting myself, I need to affirm that the act of perception can 
and must be thought as contingent in relation to the object per- 
ceived—the dissociation can and must be made. In the other 
instance I need to affirm that the act of believing is constitutive 
and that the dissociation cannot and must not be made. We must 
go into the matter more exactly. We will find a sort of ‘realism 
of the object’ and a sort of ‘idealism of faith,’ though these terms 
can only take us astray. I say that the idea of the independence 
of the object perceived in relation to the subject perceiving is 
constitutive of the idea of truth (this implies no metaphysical 
statement regarding the reality of the object in itself); on the 
other hand I say that the idea of the indissoluble unity of faith 
and of its’ object is constitutive of the religious affirmation. But 
just as in the first case I do not realise the object metaphysically, 
so in the second I do not claim that the divine reality is reabsorbed 
ina purely subjective process. Here we are in the realm of criticism 
and I do no more than point out that the conditions that form a 
basis for any affirmation regarding God are the inverse of those 
that render objective certainty possible. Doubtless faith is affirmed 
as contingent in relation to God, but such contingency is itself 
relative to faith. The reflection that is brought to bear on faith 
(and suppresses it) cannot allow the transcendental reality of 
that on which faith has bearing; such reflection converts the 


67 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


transcendental reality into question into a sort of caput mortum, 
into conceptual material lacking all content. The act that thinks 
faith is also the act that postulates divine transcendence; if the 
former is abolished the latter cannot subsist. But to make divine 
transcendence depend (in a subjective sense) on the act of faith 
means realising the act of faith in a psychological way, it means 
turning it into a sort of projection of imagination; it means deny- 
ing it and in consequence making an affirmation the very terms 
of which have been completely eliminated. 

Before deducing from this the conclusions that interest us, I 
think it is necessary to elucidate a difficulty. I have just spoken 
of the act that thinks faith (as faith), and which, in consequence, 
we do not reduce to reflection on faith. But what is this act? What 
is its relation to the act of faith in the strict sense? Obviously 
this is a major issue—in what measure does thinking faith 
already imply belief? I have described the act of faith as that 
by which the cogito transcends itself, that is to say the act 
by which the mind is constituted by positing in God the unity 
of the J think and of the empirical content with which the J think 
is bound up, (that is to say, the world). What is the relation 
between this act and the act that thinks it? The question is rather 
obscure. I think we must answer that in the end the two acts are 
doubtless identical. But inasmuch as the act of faith is still attri- . 
buted to the cogito (the universal thinking subject), it is inevitably 
defined as a kind of plausible hypothesis, it is not really faith— 
it is still as it were in function of a truth, and appears as its potential 
approximation. In this sense thinking faith does not mean be- 
lieving (for faith is still subordinated to the J think). Belief in the 
strict sense suppresses all such preliminary dialectics; and, in- 
versely, the dialectics are only possible when pure belief is not 
achieved. As long as belief remains the thought of belief and in 
consequence depends on the cogizo, it is prohibited from being 
really itself. Doubtless dialectics are entirely directed towards 
the self-renunciation of the J think; but, for all that dialectics 
are the work of the J think, the J think subsists even in the 
act by which it aspires to its own renunciation; in that sense, 
as I have already pointed out, reflection on religion is shown to be 
contradictory, it sees itself as necessarily fettered by an obstacle 
that by definition it is incapable of removing—and the act itself, 


68 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the transcendent act which would suppress this obstacle (I have 
called it grace) that it goes so far as to conceive, remains relative 
to the movement of thinking (precisely in that it is thought as 
transcending it). 
And so I think we can see clearly the distance that divides the 
act of faith from the act that thinks it. But one difficulty still re- 
__Mmains. How can this distance be really thought? Do we not need 
another act which really thinks faith and is distinct from the first? 
And does not this involve us in an infinite regression? We will 
get our answer if we remember that we must not be taken in by 
abstractions. Like all thought of whatsoever kind the act that 
thinks faith is doubtless capable of reflecting itself. And when it 
reflects itself it makes explicit its own conditions and must needs 
appear to itself as distinct from what it was for itself at the outset 
(as it was for itself from the outset but not as it was z itself). 
This reflection makes explicit the intervention of the J think as 
subject in the act which was givens datum to itselfas that by which 
the J think was transcended and negated for the benefit of faith. It 
is thanks to this reflection that the confrontation of what the act 
really was and what it aimed to be is rendered possible. Such reflec- 
tion in consequence sheds light on the dualism of the act of faith 
and the act that thinks faith. But in the process the act of faith 
seems to be pushed back beyond all limits (beyond a reflective 
process that is necessarily endless), and it seems to reflection that it 
could only put an end to the regress by self-suppression. Hence the 
idea of grace, of a power that limits reflection by suppressing it 
from without. But inasmuch as this idea in its turn remains subject 
to reflection, it must needs appear as purely relative (in the sense in 
which the beyond itself is relative). In this way we seem to be 
defining what could be called a monism of pure reflection which 
would go so far as to incorporate its ‘beyond.’ But when reflection 
reflects itself it conceives its nothingness. It destroys itself. It is 
the free act—act in which, doubtless, reflection runs the risk of 
being reborn so as to negate it reflectively, but which subsists as 
transcending what precedes it and what follows it, and which 
suddenly lights up the nothingness of its genesis and its posterity. 
It discovers that it is in the path of being, because the act by which 
reflection denies it will itself still be the negation of itself, will be, 
so to speak, changed as regards indication, but still itself. Here, 


69 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


if such be insisted, I will mention intuition. In that way light is 
also cast on the act of faith. And the negation of the act of faith 
is defined as being itself a free act—but as the fatal act, the act 
that is the inverse of faith (which is freedom self-afiirming, 
freedom self-actualising), the act by which freedom is denied— 
as the Fall (freedom negating itself freely, that is, only con- 
tinuing to affirm itself for another—positing this otherness which 
is nothingness). 

I shall have to take up several of these themes again. How is 
the free act posited? And how does the negation of itself appear to 
it as identical with itself? These points need more elucidation. 
I will restrict myself to a comment on the two dialectical moments. 
If reflection is all (i.e. what I have called the monism of reflection), 
then it turns back on itself of necessity. 


February 11th 


I would like to elucidate this further. In what has been said there 
are equivocations and obscurities. They lie in the very nature of 
the problem. The problem was how to determine the relation 
between the act of faith and the act that thinks faith. And in 
answering this question another question necessarily arose— 
regarding the conditions under which the dissociation is possible. 
But first of all is such a dissociation (dualism) really given to us 
as a fact? That seems hardly capable of being answered directly. 
It seems as though we must look for the conditions that make the 
dissociation possible, establish that once these conditions are 
given the dissociation is also given, and see if they really are 
given. 

Under what conditions can the dualism be thought? It can 
only be thought if the act by which faith is thought is revealed 
(to itself), when it reflects itself, as not identical with that for 
which it was itself originally given. Thus it must be admitted that 
though the act is already initially for itself, when it reflects itself 
it sees conditions made explicit which were not apparent to it 
in the first Ftirsichsein, and discovers that it was not really what it 
purported to be (that it was not in itself what it was for itself). 
It is only thanks to-reflection of this kind, and after it, that the act 
of faith and the act that thinks faith can be dissociated. In other 
words the thought of belief is given to itself as being belief, and 


7O 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


it is only when reflecting on itself that it makes explicit what in it 
is not belief—what, that is, is universal affirmation (cogitatio). 
The act of faith is identical with the thought of faith inasmuch as 
the latter remains (as thought) implicit, it is distinct from it 
inasmuch as it recognises itself by making itself explicit as thought 
strictly speaking. It cannot make itself explicit as thought without 
positing itself as distinct from what it was inasmuch as it was 
~ implicit. 
The act of faith, as I have already defined it, is thus shown 
to be distinct from the act that thinks it, because the latter, when 
it reflects on itself, reveals the cogito that still remains in it. 
As long as the act of faith is posited for the J think it is defined as 
hypothesis, as the positing of knowledge (of a causal relation), 
_and from this viewpoint faith remains an inaccessible ‘beyond’. 
_ I call this J chink reflection inasmuch as here it subsists as that for 

which the act of faith is posited. From this standpoint faith, 
strictly speaking, appears as that which cannot be thought save 
on condition that it is posited by a power that transcends all 
reflection, by what I have called grace. But in its turn the dualism 
of religious reflection and of grace still subsists for the reflection 
that denies it (as relative to itself). This is what I have called the 
monism of pure reflection. Only—and this is the essential point— 
such monism is by definition unstable. For all reflection is (at 
least potentially) reflection on itself. Reflection is at one and the 
same time each particular moment and the power of transcending 
that moment. But this power of transcendence is only on condition 
that reflection is for itself, and, in consequence, that it posits each 
particular moment as transitory and as suppressing itself. Such 
power of transcendence I call freedom. Inasmuch as reflection 
comprehends itself as free, it is free; but the free act, (the appre- 
hension of self as freedom), when treated as a particular moment, 
brings about a further moment that annihilates it; and in that way, 
by virtue of its ambiguous nature, reflection negates itself as 
freedom. But in the measure in which self-consciousness as trans- 
cendent (I have called it intuition) is bound up with every act 
of reflection, it is the negation of this freedom converted in its 
turn into free act (inasmuch as the moment is negated as moment 
for the benefit of the power that supports it). If the monism of 
pure reflection is not converted into an endless chain of moments 


71 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


which suppress one another, it is transformed into the unique act 
by which freedom is posited. — 

In this way the intellectual dialectic which threatened to 
eliminate the act of faith by making it the ideal term of a per- 
petual regression, is eliminated. 

What is the result of this inquiry? It is now clear that the 
dissociation between belief and the act that thinks belief involves 
us in a reflective dialectic which suppresses itself as soon as it is 
transcended (that is, is comprehended). Thus the dualism is 
suppressed by the free act. Reflection on faith which posits itself 
for itself as necessarily distinct from faith, is suppressed in the 
free act. 

But do we not end up with an absolute contradiction? If 
reflection on faith destroys itself how can faith remain a thought? 
Doubtless reflection is not purely and simply annihilated, it is 
converted into what we have called, (by a term, however, that is 
dangerous) intuitive thought. But what relation can we establish 
between intuitive thought and faith? Of course any kind of rela- 
tion that is strictly reflective must be excluded at the outset. But 
then the difficulties reappear. Intuitive thought only seems capable 
of bearing fruit if it is prolonged into reflection, that is, if it 
negates itself. When left to itself is it not used up in one sterile 
and of necessity unique procedure, that of pure affirmation? It 
seems to me that the inquiries I have made so far permit at least 
an indirect solution of the problem. We have said that the free 
act (intuitive thought), implies the negation of the dualism 
between faith and reflection on faith; but that amounts to 
saying that the negation is only of a practical character. And 
there precisely lies the importance of the conclusions we have 
reached, If the reflective dialectic suppresses itself it is precisely 
because (it is as much as to say that) the discussion of the 
relations between faith and thought regarding it can only 
be sterile. In practice it is important to deny that there is any 
teal difference between the one and the other. Real belief 
presents itself with the characteristics of an imperative. 

So we do not end up with the contradictory idea of the un- 
thinkableness of faith, but with the affirmation that if we really 
dissociate belief from thought bearing on it, we are involving 
ourselves in a process without end, we are freely renouncing our 


72 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


freedom. In the place of the dualism of faith and of thought 
bearing on faith is substituted the idea of the will to believe, 
and that will is thought to be bound by an obligation. 


February 12th 


I am not going to recapitulate the reasons for which a judgment 
cannot be brought to bear on God or on creatures inasmuch 
as they are thought as being in his image, that is, inasmuch as 
they participate in God. It is now clear that faith affirms itself 
as the will and obligation not to judge. But is there a basis for 
determining the relations that unite souls reciprocally in the dual- 
ism that I mentioned when writing about participation? I have 
pointed out that we can conceive two orders, of which one only 
is legitimate. One order consists in inferring participation as fact 
(for other minds) from participation through faith; the other in 
taking one’s stand on participation as fact by reducing the 
believer himself to participate in fact. Here we have to find a 
terminology. Only the first of these orders can be thought—we 
have already seen why. And hence we posit the idea of the believer 
as mediator, as constituting, by means of faith itself, a factual order 
which is without relation (other than mystical) to“ that faith. 
The real believer, the saint, in this sense appears as the absolute 
mediator and at the same time as the redeemer. This means that 
faith implies the affirmation of an absolute relation between it- 
self and what can be called the totality of the world of minds. And 
hence, it seems to me, participation is posited at what I would 
like to call the second degree; i.e. participation in the absolute 
mediator. 

And now a few reflections on method. 

It seems to me that all discussions about method in philosophy 
are obscured by a fundamental misunderstanding that the evo- 
lution of speculative thought has never yet dissipated. People 
persist in positing the dilemma of pure empiricism on the one 
hand, and, on the other, of reason that finds its own content 
within itself; and, setting out from an initialtruth (on the nature 
of which it would be hard to make a pronouncement) reason, 
so conceived, unfolds a whole chain of propositions thanks to 
its internal spontaneity alone. I believe the latter alternative 
should be rejected out of hand. What is to be our attitude to 


73 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


a process conceived in this purely rational way? I am con- 
vinced that if we want such generation to be possible it is because 
we are still under the influence of the idea of machinery—we 
would like to realise, in the order of reason, something analogous 
to a mechanism which functions by itself, independently of the 
will—something that moves of its own accord. I feel obliged to 
protest against any such mechanisation of thought. It may be 
argued that we should view it in terms of a desire to imitate 
mathematical reasoning. Yet we begin constructing that reason- 
ing by looking on it as a sort of rational automatism. I note that 
this goes for every method described as purely rational—every- 
where alike we run into a superstitious transposition of mechanism 
into thought itself. I am convinced that all philosophers who 
have reflected on mathematical thought, from Descartes to Henri 
Poincaré, have reacted against this crude way of representing 
thought. But for all that the fetish has survived all the blows 
delivered against it. Mechanism is continuously being translated 
into the order of thought—because mechanism is what imposes 
itself on us all—and should a hand imprudently touch the machin- 
ery it is crushed. In some way mechanism and universality seem 
to imply one another. If analytical thought was for long able to 
affirm its primacy that was because it is easy to schematise the 
mechanism of its development in a way that is in some way spatial. 
Kant’s notion of the @ priori synthesis, however ambiguous in 
some of its aspects, has the immense merit of emphasising the 
fact that rationality is capable of subsisting in its entirety even 
when a radically unmechanical element intervenes (and even plays 
a primary part). Freeing mathematics from any kind of depen- 
dence on intuition always runs the risk (though here, strictly 
speaking, there is no real solidarity) of entailing mechanisation 
and this is an error that is dangerous to philosophy. Against the 
idea of a mechanism of reason functioning, so to speak, quite on 
its own, our experience—with all its characteristics of contingence 
and subjectivity which the rationalists have taken pleasure in 
emphasising—trevolts. 


February 13th 


I believe that we must reject this dualism absolutely. However 
true the idea of a reason that organises experience may be it 


74 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


has at least the disadvantage of appearing invincibly dualistic. 
It seems to me that reason ought to be accentuated in another way. 
We need to admit that thought (reason) does not constitute 
itself as thought for itself save in the measure in which it is 
realised in experience. And this must not be understood in a 
purely psychological sense (with which Kantian theory, strictly 
speaking, could come to terms). In other words, the idea of pure 
thought anterior—even in a rational sense—to all experience 
is certainly a pseudo-idea; it is the product of a schematic and 
illusory reflection. This amounts to saying that it is as arbitrary 
to pretend to define experience in function of categories anterior 
to it, as to make thought depend on an improperly realised 
experience. Thought, it must be understood, is only known and 
grasped in experience in the measure in which the experience is 
defined as intelligible. Kantian criticism corresponds to the purely 
transitory moment in which analysis hypostatises intelligibility 
and converts it into form. 

I am still concerned by the question of the conditions under 
which religious history is possible. The foregoing inquiries prove 
that the problem cannot be stated in traditional terms. For, as is 
obvious, religious history is history in which one believes. And 
this primary fact suffices to differentiate religious history from 
history in general. (Of course I am speaking here of belief in the 
rigorous meaning of the term, not belief in the vague sense of 
an approximation to certitude.) The relation to the believing 
individuality is an element constituting the notion of religious 
history, whereas history in general is characterised by the negation 
of that relation (like all knowledge history in general implies a 
relation to the thinking subject who negates himself as individual). 
The existence of religious history may seem contingent (though 
in reality it has already been established by dialectics), but if we 
admit it, does it follow that it must have characteristics (internal 
ones this time) that differentiate it from any other history—and in 
particular does it follow that it is subject to laws which are not 
those of ordinary history? In a word, what is the relation between 
the strictly miraculous elements contained in all religious history 
and the fact that such history has reference essentially to the 
believing subject? 

It seems at the outset that if we deny the miraculous elements 


7) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


our act implicitly suppresses the relation. The miraculous elements 
can only be denied from the standpoint of historical criticism— 
which brings in the objectivist postulates of science. Inasmuch as 
the J think is substituted for the J believe the miraculous elements 
can be eliminated. But this, it may be objected, only shows up the 
self-contradictions involved in the notion of religious history. As 
history, religious history depends on the J think. In the notion 
we are discussing one domain trespasses on to another. 

We have already seen that we must regard the idea of a trans- 
historical religion as inadequate and fruitless. So it does not look 
as though we can be satisfied with such a simple relation. 

But then the question comes up again. It may be objected: 
“All this supposes that the miraculous elements are given as 
existing. But that hypothesis must be rejected. If we begin with 
the J believe no deduction of those elements is possible.” Here, 
it seems to me, a grave misunderstanding needs to be dispelled. 
There is no question of deducing religious history from the 
I believe. The important issue is whether the J delieve can be 
posited otherwise than in relation to affirmations bearing on 
history. This does not mean that such affirmations would be 
analytically implied by the / de/eve, but simply that faith would 
only be realised through the recognition of a history. We must 
not forget that with faith the datum reappears; as we have seen, 
the negation of the datum which is enveloped by knowledge, and 
on a much higher level by absolute science, cannot subsist save 
thanks to an illusion, since all rationality of whatever kind is 
based on the act that transcends a contingent datum. There is thus 
no question whatever of establishing an analytical relation be- 
tween faith and religious history—the enterprise would be ab- 
surd. We must go deeper. If our conclusions so far are really 
founded we must entirely give up seeing in religious history the 
realisation of a dialectic (Hegel) in the measure in which that 
dialectic still ‘would be’ in some way for pure thought (for the 
cogito). But if this is really so, as we can neither deny faith in the 
interests of knowledge nor see faith as an absolutely trans- 
historical act (save, as we have said, in the saint), we seem to end 
up with the conclusion that the act of faith postulates religious 
history. 

The foregoing reasoning is obscure and I would like to clarify 


76 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


it. First of all I show that if we posit a religious history it is 
necessarily bound up with the act of faith. Yet we cannot deny 
the fact that the history in question is given as datum unless we 
adopt the standpoint of analytical logic (asserting that religious 
history is not implied analytically in the act of faith), and such 
analytical logic must be absolutely excluded here, for it cannot 
operate save from a datum recognised as such. 


February 14th 


In that way some difficulties are unquestionably eliminated. 
Yet there is still the problem of how the believer can reject a 
historical investigation into the miraculous without thereby sur- 
rendering his sincerity. Is not this a very serious antinomy? Is 
not the prohibition of reflection on the miraculous equivalent to 
self-negation as thought? Of course we already know that the 
believer has to prohibit himself from reflection on God (judging 
God), but is that of the same order? God can only be thought as 
transcending all judgment. But the miraculous? If it is historical 
how can it escape the conditions that make all history possible? 
Is history on which the mind is not permitted to reflect anything 
but false history posing as true? Here, as is plain, two attitudes 
are possible. The first consists in saying that, even judged as 
history, religious history stands up to its critics—but it is perfectly 
clear that by definition criticism implies the negation of religious 
history (and furthermore takes away all ultimate value from its 
results). It is perfectly clear also that if religious history, as history, 
is constituted like all other history, it is no longer what we have 
called religious history (involving, as constituent element, a 
relation to faith). The second attitude consists in making use of 
the fact that religious history cannot subsist as such so as to argue 
in favour of its metaphysical reality. This at least means there is a 
clear perception of the fact that if history is, strictly speaking, 
religious it necessarily presents certain characteristics of irra- 
tionality. Thus it seems impossible to regard the difficulty, the 
requirement (exigence) we are up against, as contingent and 
fortuitous. If on the one hand the act of faith involves the recog- 
nition of a special religious history, and if on the other such 
religious history, by the very fact that it is religious—that is to 
say, that it embraces a relation to faith—must contain some 


77 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


miraculous elements, it follows that the believer, inasmuch as he 
is a thinking subject, is quite incapable of thinking about such 
history rationally. 


February 15th 


Must we maintain that there are categories of religious history? 
But that is singularly ambiguous. ‘The reflecting mind necessarily 
posits the unity of history. Can it be said that what matters is 
not the historical material, but the form, the interpretation given 
to it by the mind?—+eligious history being defined by the inter- 
pretation faith puts on material in itself indifferent. I do not think 
that this position is any more tenable than the preceding ones. 
It implies a dualism of matter and of form which, as we have seen, 
must needs be foreign to faith. In faith the interpretation cannot 
in any way be contingent upon the fact interpreted, which 
amounts to saying that we ought not to speak of interpretation 
here. The dualism of the fact and of the interpretation is relative 
to a reflection which dissociates the datum given and the form, 
so as to bring them together subsequently as best it may. To 
me it seems unquestionable that the problem of miracles will 
remain insoluble as long as we fail to posit the absolutely illegi- 
timate character of that reflection. Any reflection on a miracle 
makes it appear contradictory. That does not mean that the 
miracle is contradictory in itself, or at least it does not necessarily 
mean it. It may also be due to the fact that there is an absolute 
lack of adequation between the miracle and the reflection that 
bears on it. To be sure, if we make reflection an absolute, nothing 
can be really inadequate for it, there is no room for anything 
save moments in hierarchy (unequally elucidated by reflection). 
But we have precisely seen that reflection cannot treat itself as an 
absolute without negating itself; and in this sense it seems that 
the conditions on which the possibility of the free act is based 
are the very conditions that allow us to conceive the miraculous 
as transcending all reflection—as individual unity of that which 
(for reflection) is dissociated into matter and form. Is it possible to 
proceed further with the definition of what constitutes a miracle? 
A miracle only zs in the measure in which our spiritual life is 
concerned in it (that is to say, that reflection can only negate 
itself in relation to a spiritual end that is posited as absolute), 


78 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


it only zs inasmuch as it is a revelation. And in this way I find 
I am led to asking myself about the way in which revelation can 
be thought. To say that a miracle can only be understood as 
revelation is precisely to affirm that, strictly speaking, there is no 
interpretation for it. Revelation, negatively, is only suppressed 
interpretation. Revelation is by essence that which cannot be 
reflected (dissociated), and the problem of the world, in last 
analysis, comes back to the problem of revelation. Wherever there 
is revelation the miraculous is veritably present in the deepest 
sense of the term. And at this point I think it is possible to find a 
key. If nature is opposed to revelation it is precisely because 
nature is the order in which the dualism of matter and _inter- 
pretation has its reign—to such a point that the interpretation 
appears to some people as the purely contingent garment in which 
the mind clothes matter in itself indifferent to all form. For in 
nature we are in the order of knowledge (of pure objectivity). 
Wherever that dualism is suppressed the miraculous occurs. 
In this sense genuine art is a revelation, and so, though in lesser 
degree, is language (the word) inasmuch as in it the physical basis 
is united with the meaning. Of course it can be said that that is 
a purely human revelation, that there is no possible analogy 
between that kind of revelation and a revelation that is, strictly 
speaking, divine. 
an we agree to conceive revelation in this restrictive way? 
Before elucidating the question I think we need to examine an 
objection. “Doubtless,” someone may say, “if the historical 
material is posited as outside discussion your interpretation 
stands; but then it follows that the dualism of the fact and of 
the interpretation in the affirmation of revelation is only sup- 
pressed for the believer—for the historian it necessarily remains.” 
But we must not forget that the matter itself is not identical in the 
case of the believer and of the historian: how then can we say the 
latter is right and the former wrong? It seems that inasmuch as 
it is historical, the historical material is the concern of the general 
methods of history. The objection is strong but I do not believe 
it is insurmountable. May we not answer that the objection, in 
the measure in which it implies belief in the possibility of a history 
dealing exclusively with matter (isolated from interpretation) and 
so to speak anterior to the alternative, implies the very dualism 


79 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


that it aims to set aside? May we not maintain that in reality 
nothing is anterior to the alternative, that from the beginning we 
must choose between the entirely secular idea of historical monism 
and the idea of religious history that lives on in the womb of 
indifferent matter like a current in the ocean? 

What makes the discussion so obscure is that there is no pos- 
sibility of empirical or objective discrimination to permit us to 
make our choice. For it is clear that what I have called historical 
monism cannot be refuted on the plane of history. That monism 
is the very idea (formally posited) of universal reduction to a 
certain system of categories. 


February 17th 


I mean that historical monism is defined by the purely formal 
affirmation that there are universal conditions that are identical 
for every kind of history, even though the nature of the conditions 
cannot be so defined (they may be economic, sociological, etc.)— 
if a certain specification is shown to be insufficient in actuality, 
it can always be admitted, formally at least, that another would be 
adequate. From the historical standpoint it is not clear by what 
a historian could be obliged to recognise the existence of a special 
domain—that of religious history—defined in function of trans- 
cendental conditions without analogy. And this is justified by all 
that we have seen earlier, for such transcendental conditions have 
reference exclusively to faith and not to the thinking subject. In 
consequence not only are we without all hope of establishing 
the legitimacy of religious history with historical arguments— 
but, also, history must be regarded as forever obliged to hold 
such an idea in check. Religious history can only appear intel- 
ligible to the philosophical spirit if it is possible to establish that 
historical monism does not cover the whole field. 

Fundamentally the question is whether the historian really 
occupies a position this side of the point at which an interpreta- 
tion is grafted on to historical “material’’—and, it seems to me, he 
certainly does not. In reality the historian’s pure material already 
contains an interpretation. To the belief of those for whom things 
happened in one particular way the historian opposes the affir- 
mation that in reality things occurred in another way. For the false 
interpretation he substitutes an interpretation which negates itself 


80 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


as such because it claims to be the truth. The purely realist idea is 
that, in opposition to any interpretation grafted on to it, the matter 
of history in itself carries its form (as datum). That realism needs 
to be attacked resolutely. 

I think we need to set out from the principle that nothing 
justifies the thesis that there are pure historical data measured by 
which all systematisation is contingent. The notion of event 
supposes a whole, it is only defined in function of wholes. And 
that itself is enough to annihilate what I have called historical 
realism. Yet we are still very far from a rehabilitation of the idea 
of the miracle. For it seems that, between an objectively deter- 
minable whole (the history of a nation) and a whole that is only 
valid for believing consciousnesses, a distinction is inevitable. 
But when we answer in that way are we not slightly displacing the 
question? Unless it is to have recourse to pure and simple lying, 
historical reconstruction that is brought to bear on the miraculous 
must be limited to demonstrating that certain facts have been 
badly interpreted (either because of the ignorance of the spec- 
tators, or as a result of certain abnormal psychical states— 
collective psychoses etc.). In any case we have the substitution 
of one interpretation for another, the new interpretation being 
given as immanent in the facts and, so to speak, co-existensive 
with them. 

I am wondering whether these inquiries can be really fruitful. 
For in taking this path I am running the risk of coming to 
regard the truth that tends to disengage itself from historical 
psychology and exegesis as pure interpretation, so as to go on to 
say: this interpretation is worth less than the specifically religious 
interpretation, or rather: if there is a dualism of matter and form 
it is not for the believer but for the historian. Now I believe we 
need to distrust this kind of conciliation thoroughly. We must 
remember that, for reflection on history, there is no truth out- 
side what can be called the frames of truth (frames which are 
doubtless constituted in the measure that knowledge is created, 
and cannot be considered as a timeless mould, yet of which 
thought is none the less a captive). If the idea of the miraculous 
is capable of providing a philosophical content, it is on condition 
that it is not dissolved in the notion of history. I believe that the 
idea of the miracle can be given a content through the medium 


D 81 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of the idea of the present (of absolute present). The present is 
the site of religious thought—it is what has been called eternity. 


February 17th 


While religion is the perpetual affirmation of the present, history 
is the perpetual negation of the present. History only has bearing 
on becoming, it knows no fixity; nowhere can it find rest or 
stability, it only sees preparations and consummations (which 
themselves embrace the beginning of new developments and new 
preparations). In this sense history can never render the past 
present for us; in the series of entirely ideal presents which is 
realised in the representation of historical becoming we never 
meet with the real present anywhere. If the present has a reality 
that can only be as transcending historical becoming. It seems 
to me certain (though so far this is only clear to me in abstracto, 
so to speak) that the miraculous must be regarded as trans- 
cending history exactly in the sense that the present transcends 
becoming. The miracle can only be re-thought as miracle 
by religious practice—just as the present can only really be 
re-thought as present by a trans-historical act (which is itself 
perhaps fundamentally of the order of faith). Hence if we claim to 
conceive the miracle as miracle without abandoning the frame- 
work of history, we necessarily fall into contradiction (in that 
sense rationalist criticism must be regarded as absolutely estab- 
lished; it permits us to exclude a particular way of conceiving 
the relations between miracle and history). We could say, simi- 
larly, I think, that if we adopt the standpoint of homogeneous 
duration, the present as such cannot be thought—just as the 
effort of the mathematician (or of anyone who considers the 
world in mathematical terms) consists in setting aside the ‘here’, 
hicceity. The present transcends such duration, the latter is, 
strictly speaking, only conceived in function of it. If I am not 
mistaken, the miraculous should be viewed as regards the matter 
of events in the same light as the present should be viewed as 
regards their form;.as the present rendered capable of sense per- 
ception (which must necessarily appear as the action of the eter- 
nal). If conceived-in this way the miraculous must necessarily 
be in function of holiness, because only the saint really lives in the 
actual. Of course it can be objected that I am juggling away the 


82 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


most irrational characteristics of the miraculous, that I am volun- 
tarily leaving in the shade the question of whether a miracle 
really contradicts the laws of nature. But that objection implies 
an absolute misunderstanding of the solution. If we pretend to 
re-absorb the miraculous into the course of history, clearly we 
are suppressing it—the real question is whether we are in our 
rights to do so. Note that the action produced on minds is an 
essential element in the very notion of the miraculous, and so is 
the holiness of the person who performs the miracle. Hence a 
miracle must be defined as a complex relation of a spiritual order 
which—absolutely—is only thinkable in’ relation to faith. It 
would be fundamentally illegitimate to substitute for that relation 
a purely material phenomenon exclusively characterised by being 
“Gn contradiction to the laws of nature.” 

The attack will be continued, I suppose, with the assertion 
that either the miracle is a-normal in its content (but this would 
need to be established by evidence we lack or which can at all 
times be doubted), or else that its a-normal character is due ex- 
clusively to the subjective interpretation made of it by ignorant 
spectators. Does our solution ignore this dilemma? It is already 
agreed that we must reject the first alternative, for, as I have 
said, the very idea of criticism involves the negative results 
that may be its outcome. But the second alternative is no more 
acceptable, for once again it supposes the dualism of appearance 
and reality whose negation is the very condition of faith. If the 
miracle is thinkable, it is only in function of faith, that is, it is 
beyond the dualism of objective matter and of subjective inter- 
pretation, and similarly beyond the idea of a historical order— 
in the absolute present (which only is for faith). 


February 20th 


“It seems to me now that we must determine the degree in which 
a problem such as that of the miraculous has to do with the 
subject as I have defined it. I have no desire to write a philosophy 
of Christianity, and so it may be dangerous (as well as tempting) 
to pick up by chance a notion which is specifically Christian so 
as to discover what it turns into once it is transposed. I am now 
wondering about the extent I have succumbed to this tempta- 
tion as regards the miraculous. 


83 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


It is clear that the notion of religious history, as I have posited 
it, has an immediate connection with the most fundamental data 
of my work. For I think I have established that the believer must 
needs place himself within religious history (of which, moreover, 
his faith is the transcendent condition). And there is no doubt 
that it is here that the difficulties I am up against belong. For the 
religious history of which I am speaking seems incapable of being 
other than Christian history, and hence it looks as though I must 
be inevitably led to state the problem that that history involves. 
Thus a labour of critical elucidation becomes necessary. Once 
again we seem to be being carried off, as though by an irresistible 
current, towards the danger point where reflection on faith passes 
into faith. 

I will restate the difficulty. It appears at first glance as if we 
cannot escape from what is contingent in a pure and simple 
Christianisation of religious thought, save by setting up a form- 
alism that defines in the abstract the transcendent conditions that 
direct all religious thought. Now this formalism, as we have seen, 
is impossible; it is certain that the determinations characteristic 
of a religion do not amount to a particular content in which a 
form in itself universal is specified. Such formalism, supposing it 
were possible, would only have bearing on the external conditions 
(sociological or even psychological conditions, for instance) of 
religious life: the essence of religion would remain completely 
outside its framework. I have already said that religion only is for 
whoever has already passed beyond the stage at which there are 
still religions. But the question is even more complicated by the 
fact that, as we have seen, this religion does not ‘amount in any 
degree or at any stage to a universal system by means of which the 
Work of theoretical thought or even of practical reason could be 
achieved. Religion zs only for the person who surrenders himself 
to it. There is no possible transition from a judgment bearing on 
religions to faith—indeed faith even implies the absolute opposite 
of the position implied in that judgment. (I recall the expression in 
LT’ Echange: “There are no other women.”) The absolute trans- 
cendence of religion (I do not even dare say Azs religion) for the 
believer is expressed by him in the affirmation that it is true. 
This expression must be regarded as ambiguous and even as 
absolutely false by the philosopher. We are here in the domain 


84 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


of being and no comparison is possible. And that explains why 
I could not admit the statement that all religions are true in the 
measure in which they are identical: there we would still have 
some illegitimate rationalism, we would still be claiming to 
transcend faith in the name of an objective affirmation. Faith must 
appear to thought as that which cannot be transcended, as that 
_ which cannot at any degree be regarded as the approximation 
to what, for a superior understanding, would be an objective 
affirmation. This links up with the negative position I have 
developed elsewhere regarding what could be called transcen- 
dental science. . 

This, it seems to me, is as much as to say that even metaphysi- 
cally we cannot transcend the idea of salvation (salvation not 
being taken in a subjectivist sense, since, inasmuch as I am a 
believer, I must will universality; nothing is less religious than 
subjectivity in the particularist sense of the term). 

“But,” it may be objected, “all this is no more than pure 
fideism. You are only taking up anew the old idea that, whatever 
object it be applied to, faith is a value for itself; the idea that faith 
is the only reality and that the intellectual and representative 
vestments with which it is clothed always remain contingent 
in relation to it.” But I totally repudiate fideism. And that because 
when it affirms faith it suppresses it in the degree to which it 
re-establishes between itself and its surround a dualism that it is 
the mission and originality of faith to surmount. Faith has no 
truth that permits it to be isolated from the ideal realities upon 
which it depends. Inasmuch as it postulates such a truth fideism 
negates itself. ““One cannot believe in the abstract, one cannot 
believe in the void,” says my heroine, which amounts to saying 
that as soon as faith ceases to appear to itself as absolutely bound 
up with its object it negates itself as faith. It is important to em- 
phasise this realist aspect of faith. If it be said that it is a necessary 
illusion bound up with the very nature of faith, I answer that I 
have adequately demonstrated the nothingness of an interpre- 
tation that realises faith and converts it into an object (cf. all 
that was said earlier about the way in which divine transcendence 
must be thought’). 

1 Le Palais de Sable, 
2 Cf. note of February roth. 
85 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


In this way I return once more to the cardinal idea of my thesis, 
the absolute centre to which all other ideas must be referred. I'he 
relation to God, the positing of the divine transcendence alone 
enables us to think individuality. This not only means that the 
individual is himself realised as individual in thinking himself 
as creature, but also that by the mediation of the believer even 
those who remain dominated by what Claudel has called the 
spirit of the earth can perhaps gradually assume an individuality. 
If we can think divine grace (in the sense of clemency), it is 
because the believer cannot resolve himself to think that his 
intervention will be vain and that there are beings irremediably 
designed for nothingness. The real spirit of universality, which 
is the religious spirit in eminent degree, is only realised by belief 
in the divine fatherhood, by the belief in what I have previously 
called participation as fact—function of the participation through 
faith which in the religious order should be regarded as the true 
primum movens. I am convinced that the very principle of prayer 
lies in this tension and living dualism between the two modes of 
participation that are reconciled in the personal unity of God. And 
in the measure in which I cannot not think myself as participating 
in God in the two senses (the factual participation being justified 
by the ‘inverse return’ that I pointed out earlier), prayer takes 
on a profound significance and value. . 


February 21st 


Yet the problem of prayer does not yet seem to me resolved or 
even clearly stated. For in fact prayer appears to the believer (and 
it is admitted that no extra-religious value could be attributed to 
prayer), as that which may or may not be granted. But this seems 
to reintroduce the idea of divine causality. 


February 22nd (Important) 


It seems to me we must set out from the fact that even if the event 
answers the prayer it cannot appear to be determined by it save 
to the believer and only to the believer—or, in other words 
(so as to dispose of an individual interpretation that is illegi- 
timate), to faith and to faith alone. And that is enough to show 
that we cannot really speak of causality in the strict sense of the 
1 Cf. notes of February 12th. ; 


86 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


word; for the judgment of causality is by very definition objective, 
that is to say, valid irrespective of who enunciates it, valid for a 
thought in general. Is this enough to refute the religious inter- 
pretation? Is it only because we are hard put to it that we localise 
the action of prayer in the order of faith, because religion, though 
it did indeed originally aim at giving an objective explanation, has 
been dislodged from the world of objects? Here I think we must 
dispose of some equivocations. Obviously we could only form- 
ulate the distinction we are now able to establish between objective 
determination and the religious interpretation as the result of 
developing speculation at length. But the whole question is 
whether this development has not resulted in disengaging the 
very essence of religion more and more clearly; the whole 
question is whether it must be regretted, even on behalf of religious 
thought, that religious affirmations of a causal order manifestly 
can no longer have any bearing (in an objective sense). The 
answer is clear. For the really religious soul no such regret is 
possible. Religion does not require the confusion of domains, it 
cannot even adapt itself to them With ease. The “medium” of 
religious thought, of faith, must needs appear to the believer 
(inasmuch as he thinks his belief) as an essential and intrinsic 
condition outside of which no efficacy can be attributed to 
prayer. The question is whether in that way prayer and the idea 
of its efficacy degenerate into purely subjective representations 
and vain illusions. All my work leads to answering this question 
in the negative. We could not speak here of subjectivity in the 
pejorative sense of the term unless the event had an objective 
reality in relation to which the interpretation could be regarded 
as genuinely contingent. Now we know that this is not the case. 
There is no ultimate truth of the course of things of which the 
religious interpretation could be regarded as a deformed and 
imperfect vision (were it only because time itself cannot be thought 
as metaphysically real). Yet, it can be argued, if we adopt this 
standpoint what real efficacy can be attributed to prayer? Ob- 
viously this efficacy could only be of a metaphysical order. Can 
this question be in some way cleared up? 

Notice that prayer appears to itself as efficacious—or rather 
as susceptible of efficacy. Can we say that there are really cases 
in which it is “of use” and others in which it is not “of use”? 


87 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


Two other alternatives would be possible. That it is never “of 
use” or that it is always “of use”. We already know why the 
first is unacceptable; is the second any better? 


February 23rd 


It seems to me that it amounts to turning prayer into a sort of 
mechanical cause that is provided with a constant efficacy, and 
that is irreconcilable with the genuinely spiritual notion of prayer. 
The spiritual notion always supposes that between human free- 
dom and divine freedom there is a relation exclusive of all 
mechanical restraint (cf. earlier). But if we adopt the irter- 
mediary solution, in what sense are we to understand it? What 
relation between prayer and the event are we to admit? We al- 
ready know that the relation cannot be of the physical order (thatis, 
in a word, causal). I take a concrete example. We pray for the cure 
in a person we love. Suppose that person is cured. We give thanks 
to God. Does that mean that prayer has acted as a physical cause? 
Manifestly not, since, as we have already said, the action of prayer 
is only thinkable for faith (hence it is not objective in the way in 
which a causal action is objective). But in that case what is the 
meaning of prayer? How, subsequently, can we regard it as 
having been efficacious? To answer this question it seems to me 
that we must first of all try to understand exactly the position of 
those who deny such efficacy. From the rigorously determinist 
and naturalist standpoint it could be maintained that we are 
dealing with a purely blind and absolutely necessary process, 
which is indifferent to any kind of value and in which it is impos- 
sible, save by physical means, to change anything. This, clearly, 
is the standpoint of physical science. What can we answer? We 
can say that it is metaphysically false to see in this realism re- 
garding physical conditions the ultimate expression of that which 
is. We can answer that the value that the cure takes on for us is 
something in no way less real than any such conditions of fact 
(that even if we adopt the standpoint of pure fact the value of the 
cure inasmuch as it is posited as will, seems capable of acting 
physically). Pure naturalism here only rests on an equivocation. 
Moreover, naturalism is necessarily transcended by the (Stoical) 
act of optimism which posits that which is as that which is good; 
by a free act the mind forever passes beyond the order of blind 


88 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


necessity. In the measure in which Stoicism implies a free act of 
this nature it transcends all naturalism entirely. Yet from the 
standpoint of metaphysical optimism of the sort (identification of 
necessity and the good) it seems that the efficacy of prayer can 
still be contested and now in a much deeper sense than before. 
If what happens as necessity is by the same token good, I should 
abstain from asking for anything. I should limit myself to waiting 
on events since I can be sure that such events will be in them- 
selves good (however immediately tiresome they may be for me). 
This is not a question of a pure and simple acceptance of destiny, 
but of a sort of ideal collaboration by which I affirm—beyond 
all immediate knowledge—that destiny can only be good, and 
by which I submit myself in advance to all its decisions. What 
value has prayer seen from the standpoint of this kind of meta- 
physical optimism? Prayer can only survive if such optimism 
can and must be surpassed. Must it be? Can it be? 

Notice first of all that this optimism implies a judgment on 
being (on God) which is identified with the good. On what con- 
dition can that judgment be made? It depends entirely on the 
distinction between the whole and the parts. The parts, if they 
are considered separately from the whole, may be bad. But inas- 
much as they are related to the whole (and as soon as they are 
really understood, they are necessarily conceived in their organic 
connection with the whole), they should be regarded as good. 
I leave aside for the moment the difficult question of the foun- 
dation of the statement that posits that the whole is good. If I am 
myself bad it is inasmuch as I am a part that wishes to treat itself 
as a whole-(as a reality); inasmuch as I participate in the life 
of all I elevate myself to the good. It is important to ask on what 
conditions that can be posited. It implies the existence in me not 
only of the dualism of a rational nature (which conceives the 
whole) and of a sense nature, but also of the possibility of a 
progress by which that rational nature becomes more and more 
actualised in so far as it extends its empire ever further over 
the sense nature. Here we see an internal difficulty in the doctrine, 
for on the one hand the good is totally independent of me, it is 
being, and on the other I realise the good so far as it is in me 
inasmuch as I become aware of my real relation to the whole. 
It would be tempting to formulate this last point by saying: I 


Dp 89 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


realise the good (the good is realised) inasmuch as I think it as 
realised (that it thinks itself as realised). This idealist theory of 
the good which identifies the good with its Idea (or rather with 
the act that affirms it), cannot, in my opinion, have been that 
of the Stoics. For them optimism was certainly not a decree of 
consciousness. But we can see into what contradictions they 
inevitably fell. If the good is, apart from the consciousness I 
have of it, it appears impossible that awareness of it can contri- 
bute to its realisation. Or, more exactly, if consciousness contri- 
butes to it, it is not as act but as datum. But in that case we are 
left with no possible incitement to rationality; if I am myself 
irrational, the datum of my irrationality should be regarded as 
an element as much constitutive of reality (in itself perfect) as is 
the morality and the reasonable activity of my neighbour. And, 
moreover, if rationality is no more than a datum amongst other 
data, the ethic of Stoicism collapses—nothing of it can survive. 

From this we can derive an important lesson. Metaphysical 
optimism can only be reconciled with the requirements of a 
rational ethic if it is posited as a postulate or as the end of rational 
action, if the good is not thought as being outside the act by 
which I become aware of it—more precisely, if the good is con- 
stituted by the very act that affirms it. But this optimism has 
nothing in common with the metaphysical optimism that I de- 
fined earlier. Instead it appears to me to imply the “logical 
optimism” (the expression of the neo-Hegelians) that infers per- 
fection from purely formal considerations. 

In what way can I push such ethical optimism to its con- 
clusion? 


February 25th 
I will carry on with that inquiry some other day. To-day all I 


want is to note down a reflection that came to me this afternoon. 
The problem of reality as posited by materialism and spiritualism 
consists really, in the question of knowing with what things 
are made; for example with what thought is made. In this field 
materialism seems necessarily in the right as against spirituality 
because the question itself only has meaning in the order of 
material things (we ask ourselves “with what” a given manu- 
factured product has been made). From that point of view the 


gO 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


answer of the spiritualists must perforce seem absurd. As they 
have accepted the materialist way of stating the question, the 
spiritual nature to which they have recourse to account for the 
soul becomes a sort of immaterial matter, that is to say some- 
thing self-contradictory whose existence cannot—by very defi- 
nition—he established. The superiority of the idealists lies in 
their absolute refusal to place themselves on this plane and state the 
question in those terms; for to them, and rightly, the idea of an 
element out of which thought is made seems entirely meaningless. 


March 6th 


I have already emphasised the distinction that needs to be esta- 
blished between immanent optimism that binds up the affir- 
mation of value to its realisation by the moral subject—and 
metaphysical optimism that posits that the good is realised, and 
that the awareness the subject gains of it is in some way con- 
tingent in relation to it. I have noted that metaphysical optimism 
denies what is specific in moral action in the degree in which it 
converts it into a pure and simple datum that contributes in some 
way to the harmony of the whole. There is no obviating this 
fault by linking moral action up with intellection; for the relation 
which exists (from the ethical point of view) between the act of 
intellection and the good—thought as realised—remains unin- 
telligible; either the act of intellection remains absolutely external 
to its object (this is probably meaningless)—and then it cannot 
be regarded as participating in that value that it posits as co- 
extensive with itself (with this object)—or else it must be 
admitted that it introduces into the object a sort of inflation of 
value, that is to say that, in this act of intellection, at bottom it is 
the object itself that apprehends itself and hence it looks as if it 
is in virtue of an illusion that the object can be posited as really 
independent of the act and so to speak anterior to it. Pure 
moralism, then, in relation to what I have called immanent 
optimism, can be defined by its refusal to think the good outside 
the act that apprehends it, and, (as apprehension here is insufhi- 
cient), outside the immanent movement by which the moral 
subject realises it. Nevertheless, as I have pointed out, however 
elevated such “pure moralism” may be, it is demonstrably 
insufficient metaphysically. For what in fact is realisation of the 


OI 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


good in this instance? Is it not an equivocation? Inasmuch as it 
is thought as such, does not the good appear as something that 
is, and has no “requirement” of the subject who realises it? Is 
not the idea of a creation of values (Werthschépfung) morally 
unacceptable here? That point must be emphasised. 


March 12th 
I saw for the first time this morning when talking with A——— in 
what way our belief transcends all that we know of it. That is 
why I feel so embarrassed and uneasy when I am asked whether I 
believe. There is nothing on which one can imterrogate or answer. 
As soon as my belief descends into knowledge it seems to negate 
itself—and yet it reaffirms itself beyond the negation of itself. 
There is something here that is intimately bound up with the 
double fact (I perceive it more and more clearly) that divine 
transcendence only is for faith, and that faith can only think 
divine transcendence as freedom (in relation to the act of faith 
itself). Divine freedom, doubtless, zs only for me inasmuch as I 
have faith in it, but in another and infinitely deeper sense I only 
have faith in it on condition that I think it as entirely independent 
of the act by which I think it. The metaphysical solution of this 
antinomy seems to consist in saying that the act of faith is itself 
the expression of divine freedom. But we must be careful to 
remember that this latter statement only has meaning and value 


for faith. 


March 13th 


I would like to clear up definitively the notion of the ideality 
of the finite. I feel I can see there a perpetual source of equi- 
vocations and errors. 

It must of course be agreed that if the infinite is the negation 
of the finite this, as the Hegelians saw, is in the sense in which 
the negation is not a privation or an exclusion, but a reaffir- 
mation or a Riickkehr in sich. But in what sense is this reaffir- 
mation possible? 

Temporally I distinguish between the finite and the affir- 
mation bearing on the finite. (It is agreed of course that outside 
‘the act of affirmation the finite has no more than a purely abstract 
existence.) In this way it can be said that in that affirmation the 


92 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


finite truly affirms itself. But in what measure does the affirmation 
embrace its own negation? It seems to me that it is in virtue 
of the inadequation between the act of affirming on the one hand 
(which is the expression of the infinite considered positively), 
and the thing affirmed on the other, which itself only is through 
the exclusion of other things and in consequence does not 
coincide with the act that posits it. And it is uniquely in the 
degree to which that disharmony is manifested for consciousness 
(for the mind, if that be preferred) that the finite appears as 
transcending itself. Any movement of knowing thought in the 
Strict sense certainly leads to awareness of that discordance and 
inadequation. 

The complementation of the finite thus appears as the effort 
by which the mind seeks to “bring together” the affirmation 
and the thing affirmed. This movement can certainly be re- 
garded as the indivisible unity of which the affirmation and the 
thing affirmed are only the ideal moments. 


April 18th 

In the main I persist in my belief that there is no reason to affirm 
that the categories cover one another fully. For instance, it in 
no way follows, from what the personality is at the highest 
moment that we know, that everything can or should be thought 
under the category of personality, that a certain neo-critical 
monadism is true. I feel I have gone a long way from what 
I would like to call the realism of universality. It will be said 
that this attitude amounts to admitting the possibility of a 
juxtaposition of the inferior and the superior, whereas the 
superior, if it is such, should enfold the inferior and absorb it 
into itself. But the real question is in what sense the absorption 
needs to be understood. Inasmuch as it manifests itself as superior 
doubtless the superior cannot simply be juxtaposed to the known 
object. The thinking mind, inasmuch as it is mind, is not juxta- 
posed to the known object. Only I feel tempted to ask myself 
whether what is superior is not also necessarily on some other 
plane. The knowing mind realises itself at the same time and on 
the same plane as the known object (on the same plane as the 
inferior) inasmuch as it is body. And it can be affirmed that the 
superiority that consists in knowing could not realise itself 


oo 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


without the common foundations which make physical inter- 
action possible. Now in what sense does the superior really 
suppress the inferior planes? In what sense does knowing suppress 
that physical interaction of the perceiving subject (as body) and 
of the object? It would seem to me false alike to maintain that 
knowledge is purely and simply juxtaposed to physical inter- 
action (which obliges us to raise absurd problems) and to say 
that it suppresses this interaction. The truth is that it implies it 
and embraces it as its necessary and insufficient condition. 

This amounts to saying that we are mistaken if we believe 
that the predominance of the mind can only be affirmed on the 
basis of a universal spiritualism, a monism of the psychical. ‘That 
is a realist and illegitimate ‘requirement’ that I repudiate. The 
very categories on which the pretensions of spiritualistic monism 
are based are amongst those that the correct notion of the mind 
(as quantity suppressed) obliges us to posit as relative and un- 
essential. For a veritable metaphysics, that is, for a metaphysics 
that refuses to be a physics, the question of whether matter is at 
bottom mind and consciousness at the stage of birth is a question 
devoid of interest. 

Now Iam convinced that Bradley’s Absolute, an absolute and 
indivisible unity of all the elements of perfection that our ex- 
perience discovers, a massive block of reality, implies this uni- 
versalistic postulate. Real philosophy is beyond monism as it is 
beyond pluralism, because the categories of the one and of the 
many both lose all significance in the order of mind. 


April 19th 

It is worth while going back to these important points. Every- 
thing leads, it seems to me, to the question of the value of the 
category of the also, or to asking whether connections can be 
exclusively external. Monism is only intelligible if it denies this 
radically, that is to say, if it affirms that every external relation 
has in reality its basis in the absolute interiority of the One. 
Through fear of having purely and simply to juxtapose the 
superior to the inferior, monism claims to universalise the cate- 
gories of the concrete and to affirm that they overlap the abstract 
categories and are their reality. The idea of suppression thus 
appears as the fundamental, constituent condition and monism 


94 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


cannot be defined apart from it. It is difficult for me to accept 
this attitude. I do not accept the idea of the juxtaposition of the 
superior and the inferior because juxtaposition can only appear 
to us as the schema of interaction. Two bodies juxtaposed are 
two bodies capable of reciprocal interaction; it might even per- 
haps be maintained that juxtaposition already implies reciprocal 
action. T’o juxtapose knowing to physical action means trying to 
reduce one to the other. The standing debate between monism 
and pluralism turns on the question of whether there is the 
“also,” that is to say the juxtaposed, in the real. The monists, 
I think, are thoroughly in their rights as long as they limit them- 
selves to stating that the more we elevate ourselves in being, the 
more the purely juxtaposed tends to be eliminated. In this respect 
progress in being is progress in interiority. Does it follow that 
we can realise the pure interiority that the monists desire? Is it 
necessary to seek to eliminate the ontological value of the “‘also” 
(to refuse it all intrinsic reality) so as to deny it? The primary 
question here is whether such elimination is real or illusory. 
However hard we may try to deny it there is a plane of thought 
which is that of the ‘“‘also.”” The point is whether, if we deny that 
this plane is ultimate, we thereby affirm the monist thesis of the 
reducibility of the external connections to relations of interiority. 
Once again we want to know whether the monist theory that 
introduces the intervention of a kind of extension (conceived as 
totality, as integrality) into the order of the concrete is still 
legitimate; or whether reality is suppressed extension, that is, 
that for which the question of extension has ceased to be posited 
(i.e. that which can realise itself no matter where, but not every- 
where; for everywhere would once again imply a relation essential 
to place, place being understood in a sense not necessarily spatial). 

The gravest objection that could be made to my view would 
consist in saying that the concrete should be a power or potency 
(puissance), thus reintroducing the notion of extension. Is that 
objection valid? 


‘April 20th 
Provisionally I leave aside the idea of power or potency so as to 


note an observation I made yesterday that seems to me important. 
Independently of all the internal criticisms aroused by the idea 


95 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of an objective (dialectical) determination of the content of the 
world, it appears to me clearly that, if the requirements of the 
spiritual life are to be met, that content should be regarded as 
objectively non-determinable. Supposing that we could demon- 
strate objectively, that is to say in a valid way, a way valid for a 
thought in general, that our universe is governed by a spiritual 
principle, the demonstration would render impossible the radical 
freedom that can only manifest itself by faith. Faith (and thence 
spirituality) is only possible if metaphysical doubt is in some way 
imposed on the mind by the nature—in itself indeterminable— 
of the object. Were a science of providence possible, providence 
would cease to be a religious affirmation, it would be reduced to 
a sort of perfected mechanism, whereas the postulates of the 
religious consciousness go beyond all mechanism. 

This process of argument presents, in my eyes, an almost 
absolute value. It is not a question of postulating factual con- 
ditions in the name of legitimate requirements (some people 
mistakenly think this is the basis of the Kantian argument). 
The argument does not bear on fact. True, it may be objected 
that what I call the religious consciousness is perhaps only a 
preparatory moment of the spiritual life, one destined to disappear 
at the heart of an integral science of reality—I note that the 
objection can only be made from the standpoint of metaphysical 
optimism—that we can conceive humanity entering into direct 
and conscious communication with superior powers, demiurges, 
and those communications taking the place of the mystery of 
worship and adoration. What about such a hypothesis? I believe 
it is precisely a hypothesis and that is its weakness; it is essentially 
something that may, and also may not, be realised. It brings 
about the intervention in what is actually the religious order, of 
elements of contingence and potentiality; without previous justi- 
fication it posits the possibility of communications that would 
need after all to be founded on laws that are in some way physical. 
For obviously if such communications are miraculous, we are no 
longer dealing with the same question. 

But then, the argument continues, at the most this proves that 
religion as such has not to busy itself with such future possi- 
bilities. Even so is not reflection capable of envisaging them? 
But that supposes that it is possible for reflection to transcend the 


96 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


religious consciousness. Now the value and the supreme signi- 
ficance of religious affirmations reside precisely in this—zhat 
they transcend all reflection. To posit as possible a science of what 
is actually an object of faith is not to think faith, but to go back to 
what faith has left for ever behind it. 

When metaphysical optimism posits a science of providence 
as possible in the future, it falls short of the religion which, it 
claims, can be surpassed. 

In consequence, from the moment it has been established that 
religious thought transcends reflection, that it is only thinkable 
as transcending reflection, the impossibility of an objective or 
notional determination of the spiritual content of the world has 
been demonstrated. From the standpoint of metaphysical know- 
ledge the world remains the site of uncertainty, the reign of the 
possible, it remains contingent in relation to religious thought. 
In that sense the notion of progress, conceived in the only meta- 
physically valid sense of the term, must be radically rejected. 

Such an attitude is distinct from agnosticism, it is even 
opposed to it in that it implies the radical negation of the science 
of the real that agnosticism posits as outside thought and at once 
realised and inaccessible. Doubtless we must allow that the 
knowing subject, in the measure in which he sets about deter- 
mining the rational content of the world, posits such a science as 
something that must be, so to speak, rediscovered and re-begotten. 
Knowledge cannot be defined for itself save as a reproduction, 
asacopy. . . . Itis only to pure reflection that the object copied 
is shown to be engendered by the act that copies it. 

Science as science is absolutely incapable of liberating itself 
from the idea of the world as realised knowledge that we have to 
find anew. It is a legitimate mode of representation and even one 
that can be called indispensable. It only becomes vicious when 
it is erected into a metaphysical construction. Now that is pre- 
cisely the mistake common to optimism and pessimism, for both 
alike claim to formulate judgments on the content of the real 
which is posited as an object of science; that is to say they trans- 
pose into the metaphysical order the postulate that consists in 
positing the real as science which is exclusively valid in the order 
of science. The fundamental contradiction in Schopenhauer’s 
system consists in formally treating being as science (knowing) 


eed 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


(as it can be determined objectively as possessing certain charac- 
teristics) and then assigning to it characteristics of irrationality 
that are incompatible with the relatively rationalist way in which 
the problem is tackled. To both optimism and pessimism I 
answer that: there is no objectively valid judgment bearing on being. 
Here we need to forestall an objection. “You are only re-esta- 
blishing,” I may be told, “the dualism of being and the pheno- 
menon in its most sterile and out-of-date sense, being is no more 
than the empty and intrinsically unreal ‘within’ of which Hegel 
speaks.” But the real question is whether the dualism as I con- 
ceive it is not entirely different, or rather whether, strictly 
speaking, there is any dualism between what is within knowledge 
and what is beyond knowledge (here the problem is stated in 
terms that are quite different from those involved in the logic of 
essence, which is itself wholly within knowledge). What I have 
said elsewhere of the relativity of the dualism of appearance and 
reality shows how far I am from the attitude attributed to me 
by this objection. 


April 21st 


The principal interest of the preceding process of argument 
consists in establishing the impossibility of any attempt to base 
atheism on a philosophy of nature. In fact, supposing it were 
possible to define nature objectively as the realisation of a will 
-or a decree, that definition would have no bearing on anything 
specifically religious and specifically divine. Faith in providence 
could not be converted into a science of providence without the 
collapse of religion. But as soon as it is no longer even con- 
ceivable that the philosophy of nature could furnish a basis for 
apologetics, inversely it can no longer be invoked by the enemies ~ 
of apologetics; it is entirely indifferent in relation to the religious 
problem. 

It is plain that the idea of an objective refutation of atheism 
is a contradictory idea. Atheism is by definition that which cannot 
be objectively refuted; but it is also that which cannot be ob- 
jectively demonstrated, or rather that of which the objective 
demonstration should be regarded as essentially void (since the 
very idea of such a demonstration in some manner embraces its 
conclusions). 


98 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Hence we can see clearly the mediatory réle of religious 
thought without which God cannot really be thought. Moreover, 
we know already that this does not amount to making God 
dependent on religious thought, but quite the contrary, that the 
religious act is supremely the act by which thought posits God as 
transcendent in relation to it, the act in its turn being thought 
as that which cannot be reflected (that which cannot be treated 
_ as a projection). If pure reflection tries to seize on these successive 
acts and to see in them purely subjective steps, it is reduced to 
nullity at the outset by the act of faith that goes beyond it and 
forever denies it. 

There we are stating the general critical problem raised by all 
this endeavour: how is it possible to have a justification of what 
by definition claims to transcend all reflection? Does not jus- 
tification mean reflection? Are we not in the realm of the un- 
justifiable, the arbitrary? And can that pitfall be avoided other- 
wise than by recourse to a demonstration, that is to say, to some- 
thing whose impossibility has already been established. I answered 
this criticism superabundantly when I pointed out that the 
I think, as free act, as condition of certitude, itself also transcends 
all demonstration because all demonstration is based on it. Yet I 
recognise that an objection is possible. If, in fact, someone alleges 
the universality of the J think (as opposed to the non-universality 
of religious thought) and we answer that the J think, as self- 
consciousness, is not universal, by accepting the parallel am I 
not letting it be understood that religious thought, too, can be 
regarded as universal in so far as we admit that it cannot not be 
for itself? And if, alternatively, we refuse to admit this are 
we not obliged to deny the validity of the comparison and to 
define religious thought as a subjective and contingent pheno- 
menon? Note, moreover, that to posit the universality of religious 
thought seems to mean restoring to it that character of objectivity 
(objective being taken in the sense of that which is valid for a 
thought in general) which appeared to us incompatible with its 
essence. Recourse to the cogito thus does not seem to help us to 
elude the dilemma. 

By dint of reflecting on the obscure notion of universality I 
have been led once more to take up the problem of the necessary. 
It seems to me actually that in the current notion of the necessary 


99 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


we can disentangle three elements: the first is the conjunction or 
constant succession that appears to be a sign of the necessary, 
the second is the psychological (or even muscular) experience of 
constraint which, in my opinion, has not been insisted on enough, 
the third is rational concatenation such as we see manifested, 
for instance, in. geometry. 

What do we mean when we state that between two phenomena 
given in time there is a necessary relation? Obviously we do not 
only mean to say that once the first is given the second follows; 
or rather we admit such a constant sequence, but it appears to us 
as the sign of something which is necessity. I think we apply to 
the fact of constant consecutiveness the habit we have of seeking 
for the cause of phenomena. Necessity (in the vaguest sense) is 
posited as cause of the constant consecutiveness. And it is here 
that the two elements I have just been speaking about appear. 
I am convinced that, in last analysis, we project our experience of 
constraint into things and that when we affirm that they necessarily 
follow one another, we limit ourselves to supposing in them a 
sort of psycho-physiological becoming analogous to our own. 
But as we reflect, and claim to pass beyond that fiction, we have 
recourse to the notion of rational concatenation, and for a crude 
type of constraint we substitute an entirely ideal kind of constraint 
in virtue of which our ideas link together in certain determined 
modes. So here we will limit ourselves to postulating ideal 
relations analogous (though in a more complex order) to those 
that we recognise amongst the simpler essences that we can study 
directly. 

But this only displaces the issue. The question still remains: 
How can we confound the relation that unites the constraint in 
virtue of which our ideas are attracted together or repel one 
another—with necessity strictly speaking? Is such constraint the 
sign of necessity, or on the contrary does it create necessity? 
Are we going to be tempted to say that the ideal constraint is 
only the interior reproduction of muscular constraint, and so 
descend once more from the order of ideas to the order of bodies 
(and see the very idea of the necessary disappear). 


April 22nd 
I am trying to posit the problem in terms that are simple and lack — 
100 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


ambiguity. But first of all, I believe we must distinguish questions 
that we are in danger of confounding. 

As regards what I have called ideal constraint, the problem 
seems to be as follows. Given the relations the mind discovers 
between ideas (relations of inclusion or exclusion, of compati- 
bility or incompatibility), how can constraint or ideal necessity be 
defined in function of those relations? Note that the number of 
possible solutions here is very limited. Either we see in necessity 
a characteristic that is constitutive of such relations, or else we 
posit constraint as exterior in some way to the ideas and the bonds 
that unite them. The first solution is visibly absurd, for the 
question regarding the necessity in virtue of which that character 
is imposed on the mind and received by it remains outstanding. 
In addition we could show that such a solution would render 
either error or truth inconceivable (if the action exercised by 
ideas on the mind were in some way physical, it ought to be 
infallible—in any case freed from all characteristics of ideality). 
So we must admit that necessity and constraint come from the 
mind and not from ideas, though this supposes an unacceptable 
dualism between the mind and ideas. I will put this first result in a 
nutshell as follows: Supposing we posit the dualism of the mind 
and of ideas, it is from the mind and not from ideas that the con- 
straint comes. On a deeper level, if one and the same reality is 
considered in turn as activity reflecting on ideas and as a whole 
of ideas reflected, it is as activity that it appears to account for 
the character of ideal necessity which is attached to the relations 
that unite ideas to one another. This second proposition, by the 
fact that it illuminates the fundamental unity of the mind, has 
the special advantage of excluding any subjectivist interpretation 
that would imply the reciprocal exteriority of form and matter. 

Yet the appearances do not seem to be in favour of this inter- 
pretation; for, far from assigning to them a necessity that does 
not belong to them, the mind appears to itself as finding, between 
ideas, relations given to it as necessary. How is this impression 
reconcilable with what I have just said? It is only so, I think, on 
condition that we insist that the mind recognises itself in its ideas, 
and that the relations existing between ideas are only imposed on 
it as necessary because it itself, in them, is given to itself, and 
borrows in some way their disguise. There, doubtless, lies the 


Io! 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


deepest secret of intelligibility—which realises in itself the union 
and fusion of necessity (external apparent action of the ideas on 
the mind) and of freedom (real interior and autonomous action 
of the mind on itself). 

Ideal constraint is only possible and justifiable if it regains 
possession of the will by which the mind makes itself mind— 
that is to say the will to be mind. 

But, it may be said, the ideal matter with which the mind 
finds itself confronted is external to it, and so how can it clothe 
itself in it so as to constitute itself? An objection of this kind 
refutes itself. For it supposes a mind that is a datum given, is a 
thing confronted with another thing; a thing (be it a form) to 
which another thing is external—whereas the mind is nothing 
save the very negation of such exteriority. The life of the mind, as 
Hegel has seen profoundly, is the suppression of such exteriority; 
the mind is the term that suppresses itself as term. So we must not 
represent to ourselves a realised and ready-made faculty to which 
ideas are given from without. Were we to set out from such a 
crude representation it is clear that intelligibility itself would 
become unintelligible. Instead we must represent to ourselves— 
outside any spatial scheme—an order that creates itself, but 
which can only do so by denying exteriority, in such a way that 
exteriority needs to be given (in the most exact, that is the 
emptiest sense of the term) at least as appearance for this order 
to be able to realise itself. In this sense the mind only realises 
itself as experience for this order which creates itself beyond 
exteriority and, thanks to it, is experience itself. Necessity appears _ 
as the very armature of this experience whereas at bottom it is 
only the inverse image of freedom. 

The Kantian scheme of an understanding informing and 
ordering from without the matter furnished to it, is in this sense 
only a transitory and clumsy expression of the fundamental idea 
that there is only knowledge and intelligibility where exteriority 
has first of all been affirmed and then denied and reduced. In 
this way we can clearly see the individual and antinomical link 
between the empirical and the intelligible. 


April 23rd 
So I return to the idea of a mind that only realises itself in and 
102 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


beyond exteriority. But there are still equivocations to be dis- 
pelled. For do I not seem to be upholding the idea that necessity 
is in some way a formal creation of the mind? No, I claim that 
the mind only becomes for itself (that is, only becomes mind) 
inasmuch as reality seems to it to be directed by a necessity 
within it. But, it may be said, here we are faced with alternatives. 
Either it is by an illusion that reality appears to mind as possessing 
in itself such a character of necessity—and we are back at sub- 
jectivism; or else it does effectively possess it and we are once 
again up against all the difficulties of realism. I believe the answer 
lies in showing that the two alternatives are equally devoid of 
meaning. On the one hand we do not escape from realism by 
realising necessity in a legislative understanding (which, more- 
over, is defined in terms of a thing exterior to other things); on 
the other hand, as we already know, when we realise necessity 
in things, we do not take into account that such necessity is 
valid for the mind still conceived in a receptive and physical sense. 
The mind, I said, only becomes mind on condition it recognises 
a world of necessity. It does not appear to itself as creating this 
world, and in reality it does not create it; it discovers it, and in the 
measure in which it discovers it, it thinks it necessarily as being 
independent of the act by which it thinks it. The mind in one 
sense is precisely this discovery, it can only think itself indepen- 
dently of this discovery by a fiction whose illegitimate character 
is detected by speculation. But then is it contingent that there 
may be necessity? Exactly in the measure in which it is contingent 
that the mind is in being, and no more. Now the reality of the 
mind ceases to be contingent as soon as a thought arises; the 
very act by which I interrogate myself on the contingence of 
mind suppresses the contingence; and as for the act itself, it is 
only by an illusion that I can try to pass beyond it. The necessity 
and the intelligibility of nature thus depend on the reality of 
the mind, though not in the simplicist sense of the Kantian philo- 
sophy, but in the deeper sense that the mind cannot be realised 
save in the degree and measure in which such necessity is con- 
stituted—not exactly by it (because it is only for it on condition 
it is thought as not being by it)—but for it. It is only by an 
_ abstraction which the very life of the mind denounces as vicious, 
that we can dissociate a pure thought subsisting in itself from 


103 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


an undetermined nature that could be the reign of disorder. 

It can be seen how these ideas, still only glimpsed confusedly, 
have begotten the notion of a universal dialectic or deduction— 
whereas, if better understood, they would have brought with 
them the certainty that such a dialectic and deduction are impos- 
sible. For from the moment at which we have grasped the fun- ~ 
damental réle of exteriority as moment of spiritual life, the idea 
of a system constituted by the simple application of an internal 
principle, merely by the mechanism of a dialectic, is seen to be 
contradictory. Such a system can never be constituted save as 
provisional and as within a constructing experience. 

Here not unnaturally we come up against the question of the 
measure in which a spiritual totality of this kind can be regarded 
as dissociable from the experience in relation to which it is defined. 
It seems to me that the difficulty is that we always fall into the 
realism of the intelligible which in reality ends up in the suppres- 
sion of the intelligible. Intelligibility as I conceive it is a dynamic 
relation, the relation of tension by which the mind is constituted 
when it organises its world; it cannot be realised outside that 
relation. It seems to me that the possible objection here proceeds 
from what I should call the philosophy of analytics. Is it not 
intelligible in itself, objectively, that a whole implies its com- 
ponent parts? Have we not there at least one type of intelligi- 
bility that does not require the dynamic relation of which I have 
spoken? But I believe that it is precisely in the simplest analytical 
relation that it is easiest to recognise the accuracy of what I have 
said. Doubtless that A is A is posited objectively; but there is 
nothing in it that imposes itself from outside the mind. Logical 
thought is constituted by positing that A is A, by the discovery 
of that internal identity that appears to it as objective and which 
really is so, provided that by objectivity we do not understand 
the exteriority of something juxtaposed to thought. I recall once 
more that such a juxtaposition is in a general way void of meaning 
(it is a false notion due to the hidden intervention of the notion 
of the thinking subject as physical agent, as body). Thus thought 
defines itself in the measure in which the logical relations are 
defined for it; the dualism which seems to exist between the 
relations and itself is only the dualism there is between the fact 
of being in itself and being for itself{—a dualism which is resolved 


104 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


in unity; the pure Firsichsein would be a contradictory and 
empty form; the J chink is only valid as perception of the unity 
between the ‘in itself’ and the ‘for itself.’ 


April 24th 

This amounts to saying that intelligibility cannot in any way be 
conceived as external relation between thought on the one hand 
and totality of ideas on the other. Any effort to reinforce the 
notion of intelligibility by trying to show how it is imposed from 
without ends up in the very negation of the notion; there is only 
intelligibility where the mind, though not positing its ideas as 
identical with itself, recognises itself in them. The problem of 
intelligibility cannot even be stated unless we give up conceiving 
thought as a term that is either a datum given or a formal con- 
dition exterior in some way to what is given to it. From the 
moment at which we thus stabilise thought and deny it as activity, 
we condemn ourselves to seeing in intelligibility either a mystery 
or a purely psychological residue. I take up once again the 
dilemma that this process of argument seems to bring with it. 
It can be stated thus: “Either intelligibility is as it were an ob- 
jective emanation of the intrinsic nature of ideas, which is what 
you deny—or else it remains a sort of stamp of entirely subjective 
origin which is attached by the mind to certain relations. And be- 
sides being obscure, this last solution is in danger of passing into 
the first, because it seems that it must be for intrinsic reasons that 
the mind declares some given relations valid and others not.” 
To this I answer that there is really no dilemma because the 
two alternatives imply the same postulate (and that is why they 
come together). This postulate, which I reject, is that there are 
on the one hand ideas and on the other there is a thought external 
to them which from outside expresses affirmations bearing on 
these ideas. Now, I repeat, if we admit such exteriority, if, instead 
of seeing in exteriority something that thought suppresses as 
soon as it is realised, we make of it an ultimate relation subsisting 
between thought and its object, then we necessarily arrive at 
the very negation of the thought whose exercise we wanted to 
understand. Thought is only exteriority suppressing itself, ex- 
teriority treating itself as provisional moment, and in consequence 
appearing as a phase which implies it but passes beyond it. If we 


105 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


stabilise this phase we remain in a sort of imaginary space which 
in no degree symbolises the living, dynamic order which is 
thought. 

But, it will be rejoined, there is still a precise question: How 
do we make the discrimination between what is and what is not 
intelligible? First of all, I think, we need to realise that the 
distinction of what is, and what is not, intelligible cannot in any 
degree be posited as absolute. There are only absolutely clear-cut 
distinctions in the elementary field; distinctions appear the more 
radical inasmuch as thought, as function of harmony, is less 
completely realised (for example, with the sensations). The value 
of the distinction between the intelligible and the non-intelligible 
depends on the value of the norm (made more or less explicit) 
in function of which this distinction is made; and here we raise a 
singularly important new question which is that of knowing 
what is the value of norms. 

We must notice, I think, that even the meaning of this ques- 
tion is eminently obscure. If interrogating ourselves on the value 
of a norm means measuring this norm by another norm, we risk 
being carried away into an infinite regression—unless thought 
itself can be posited as norm. Can it? If it cannot, either the ques- 
tion of the value of norms is meaningless, or else it ought 
to be stated in new and different terms which we need to look 
for. 

It is clear that if thought can identify itself as a supreme and 
unconditional norm the question of the value of a particular 
norm may have the meaning I have already given to it. But is 
this so? It is enough to recall what I have said regarding the 
impossibility of realising thought itself as norm, and regarding 
the impossibility of treating thought other than as act and as 
life, to see that only by an abuse could thought treat itself as 
norm. This is not equivalent to denying that there is a supreme 
norm of thought, but only to denying that thought can identify 
itself with the norm and to showing that the question of the value 
of this norm cannot even be raised, or, at least, cannot be stated 
in the simple terms that I suggested earlier. (More precisely: 
suppose this norm to be the principle of identity. We cannot 
identify thought with that principle, because the intelligibility 
that makes that principle what it is, that makes it valid, does not 


106 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


belong to it objectively, but is bound to the act by which the mind 
recognises itself in it, etc.) 

To posit (still hypothetically) a supreme norm is thus to limit 
ourselves to conceiving a first and in some way immediate stage 
of intelligibility, in which thought must recognise itself before 
it is able to affirm anything (this, of course, applies to the order 
of reflection, not to the order of time); and the value of this norm, 
far from being defined in function of another norm (which would 
be infinite and contradictory), or through itself (which would be 
meaningless), remains subordinated to the free movement by 
which the mind realises itself. 

This amounts to saying that however far we go in the ob- 
jective analysis of the principles and the formal conditions of 
thought, we will never come to a primal condition, if by primal 
we understand a source of intelligibility. Intelligibility itself 
always transcends all principles and forms of this kind; it cannot 
be defined other than by an appeal to the very life of thought 
(which is what Plato saw better than anyone). 

Hence we can conclude that in every case there is a sense in 
which it is illegitimate and even absurd to posit an “eternal 
axiom” or a unique generating law from which the natural laws 
derive; it is the objective and realist sense, the sense that Taine 
uses. Such a law, supposing it exists, is always subordinate to 
the principle of intelligibility as I have defined it. 

Thus we see that discrimination is always subordinated to 
norms which themselves can only be posited as relative to the 
realisation of the intelligible, to the constitution of that order 
that the mind wills when it wills itself. 

Here once again I take up the examination of the question of 
why there is order in nature. My answer is as follows: 

The question itself implies the hypothesis of the possibility 
of a thought which is order and reason and is juxtaposed to an 
irrational world. But this dualism is suppressed when it is thought; 
for, I must repeat, thought is not something placed face to face 
with something else, order is not something external to some- 
thing else. The order of thought could not be defined for itself 
if it did not discover the order of things. The progress in ration- 
ality which defines thought could not be realised independently 
of the progress in the knowledge of things which is knowledge 


107 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


itself inasmuch as knowledge is life—this second progress being 
itself fictitiously realised as system. If someone objects that 
thought is for itself a mystery and might well be irrational, I 
reply that irrationality can only be defined in function of an ideally 
posited reason, and that in consequence the hypothesis is self- 
destructive. 

In short, what we call the rationality of the world is only the 
fictitious projection of the life of knowledge, a life which con- 
sists at one and the same time of finding and constituting. In this 
sense, far from knowledge being a reflection of the world, the 
world is the reflection of knowledge; though it must be fully 
understood—I repeat—that knowledge implies not the idea of a 
perpetual creation by a pre-existing understanding, but the idea 
of a thought which is discovered in discovering the world and 
has its life in that very discovery. The idea of a rational ready- 
made world that only has to be rediscovered is really no more 
than an aspect arbitrarily dissociated from the complex movement 
by which the mind is realised in recognising the world. The 
idea of a world completed by the mind, through which it becomes 
conscious of itself, is of greater interest. It is a better safeguard 
of the indissoluble unity outside of which everything ceases to 
be intelligible. 

But amongst a thousand other problems one special problem 
arises here. Is not the mind reduced to something which becomes _ 
in time, something which, in consequence, is or remains external 
to itself or dissolves itself, something which flees from itself 
when it seeks itself? Whereas the mind must be something which 
finds itself; and that which finds itself, in finding itself, frees 
itself from time. 

The solution I glimpse, though very imperfectly, lies in a 
relation analogous to the relation I defined earlier for exteriority 
in general (time, moreover, is only one mode of exteriority, 
though perhaps it marks a progress in relation to space in the 
process of self-suppression by which exteriority is realised and 
completed). 


April 25th 

This is really nothing more than a specification of my general 

theory of intelligibility. To realise mind as the site of the intel- 
108 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


ligible in a non-temporal identity would. still mean establishing 
between the mind and the “something else” that exteriority that 
it is the mind’s function to reabsorb into itself. I repeat that to 
posit the mind as external to anything whatsoever (even to a 
world of pure exteriority), is to treat it as a thing that can play 
its part in an order of juxtaposition, and in consequence is to 
make it external to itself. In that way there is an explicit basis 
for what I said previously about the necessity of integrating 
exteriority as ideal moment. 

I would like to throw light on this general theory. Would 
it be adequately expressed if I said that the intelligible is realised 
in space and in time? Perhaps, but on condition I specified that 
the intelligible is not exterior to the realisation, that the realisation 
is not only the contingent completion of the intelligible, but 
also a constitutive moment which cannot be set aside without 
the intelligible destroying itself. Only this in its turn is not 
acceptable, is not true, unless we add to it an all-important com- 
plement, namely that pure intelligibility can only be constituted 
outside space and time on condition that it has passed through the 
medium of space and time. (The example that occurs to me, though 
its validity needs verifying, is the following: geometry, inasmuch 
as it is a non-temporal and non-spatial whole, is only possible 
through the mediation of the becoming—at one and the same 
time temporal and spatial—of a consciousness bound to a physical 
substratum. I must return to this.) Thought cannot define itself 
as transcending space and time unless the link between thought 
and space (or time) is a genuinely constitutive and functional 
moment of its life; and the intelligibility which belongs to pure 
thought (that is to say thought transcending space and time) 
cannot be defined without an appeal to this mediating experience, 
for it is the experience that makes it possible. 


April 27th 

All that I have said before leads to the conclusion that intelligi- 
bility is nothing which can be defined from without, and in that 
way certain insoluble questions are set aside. I would say more; 
strictly speaking intelligibility is not something that can become 
an object for the mind. It is only by an illusion that thought 
can believe that it posits the intelligible outside itself, confronting 


109 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


itself. In reality as soon as it confronts intelligibility thought 
makes intelligibility cease to be itself, for intelligibility can only 
be defined in thought, and as its very life and soul; it is the moment 
through which thought constitutes itself as thought, and neither 
by right nor in fact can thought be separated from intelligibility. 

It may be objected that I myself am doing precisely what I 
seem to condemn. Am I not myself defining what I posited as 
indefinable? Am I not converting intelligibility into an object? 

This obliges me to recapitulate. I set out by saying that intel- 
ligibility cannot be considered as an intrinsic property of an idea 
or of a group of ideas, nor can it be conceived as a relation 
between an idea (or a group of ideas) and thought itself conceived 
as external to a given idea or group of ideas. Intelligibility, I said, 
can only be conceived in function of an immanent movement by 
which thought grasps itself in a whole of ideas which are only 
its object in the measure in which it itself can become its own 
object. A whole of ideas is only intelligible in the measure in 
which the mind recognises itself in that whole. But here we 
come to the question that I raised just now. Inasmuch as I think 
intelligibility in this way, inasmuch as I reflect it, do I not, even 
when I deny it as an object, or as a property or objective relation, 
posit it as exterior to the act by which I reflect it? By the very act 
by which I claim to suppress it, do I not reconstitute the relation 
of exteriority between thought and the intelligible? We seem 
to be in the presence of a dilemma. Either all reflection on 
intelligibility is impossible, or else, if a certain reflection on in- 
telligibility is legitimate, this is because there is at least one sense 
in which thought can in some way dissociate the intelligible 
from itself and oppose it to itself. My answer, I think, must be 
simply this: no doubt intelligibility can be an object of reflection 
for thought, but only in the sense in which thought can be such an 
object for itself, and provided that we do not make any distinction 
whatsoever between thought itself and the intelligible. Observe 
that to deny the possibility would be either to deny that thought 
can be an object for itself, or else to create once more, though 
in the opposite sense, the dualistic gulf between thought and 
intelligibility that we intended to suppress. 

I would like to clear up more completely the conclusions that 
should be drawn from this inquiry. 


IIo 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


In the first place we are led to the view that to seek to define 
intelligibility in function of certain formal conditions (that an- 
alysis shouid discover) is a vain enterprise. Such conditions cannot 
account for intelligibility itself; they can only appear to do so in 
virtue of an illusion that can always be detected, and in this sense 
I see myself obliged to deny all philosophical content to the idea 
of evidence (that is to say of intelligibility per se). We can no 
more dream of realising a principle of intelligibility than we can 
realise intelligibility itself. So when we think of the forms of 
order (conditions of intelligibility), we must remember that, 
from the speculative point of view, these forms should be re- 
garded as posterior to the intelligibility for which at first sight 
they seem to need to and to be able to account. This not merely 
because the forms can only be defined after and according to an 
experience in which they are already applied or realised, but 
also, in the infinitely deeper and more intrinsic sense, because the 
strictly formal moment of intelligibility is posterior to and 
relative to a genuine dynamic and constitutive moment—of 
which it is only the schematisation and translation into dualistic 
language. 

So intelligibility is not in function of the forms, the forms 
are in function of intelligibility and, I repeat, it is necessary 
that this should be so; for to render an account of intelligibility is 
either to think nothing or else to pre-form the intelligible itself 
in the formal principle that is destined to give an account of it. 

Yet the problem of the possibility itself of this self-recognition 
seems to be posited in more and more threatening terms. How 
can we avoid admitting that it is by some pre-existing norm 
that the mind is guided in the self-research in which I have seen 
the very condition of intelligibility? And how can we give an 
account of this norm? (This links up with the problem raised 
earlier.) If, for example, I say that the mind recognises itself 
in the identity of A, and that it is for that reason that that identity 
becomes a norm, does not the question arise of why it recognises 
itself in that identity? 

If I am asked why the principle of identity is intelligible 
(why the mind recognises itself in it), I can answer by placing 
myself on several hierarchical planes. On one of those planes I 
would say: because identity is the very condition of the exercise 


III 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of thought (this exercise being no longer the formal but the real 
condition to which I should refer myself). But on a higher plane 
I would say that intelligibility is not something that permits of 
a reason; (for, as I said earlier, when we give reasons we only 
displace the problem, and the question once more comes up of 
why thought must be capable of being exercised—which cannot 
be dealt with because the question, as a question, is absurd). 

So the answer is always that when thought isolates itself from 
the identity and separates the identity from itself, it suppresses 
itself: that thought can only be concretely defined as thought in 
and through identity; it is i that that intelligibility consists 
though it is not that that accounts for intelligibility (I repeat that 
intelligibility is not a thing for which reasons can be given). 
From this point of view the intelligible is defined as that which 
we cannot genuinely set aside, that which reappears in the 
negation of itself (this is particularly clear as regards identity). 

Hence it seems that every intelligible should be at one 
with a certain dialectic on which, as such, it is founded—though 
this dialectic is not necessarily thought as exterior to experience, 
and, in general, it is experience that functions as dialectic (save 
concerning the most abstract forms of thought—and is there 
not even an experience of pure thought? I am convinced there is). 

To sum up, intelligibility is to a quite external link between 
thought on the one hand and ideas on the other what the internal 
mediation of the judgment is to the unity, considered extrinsi- 
cally, of the subject and the predicate. That is to say that just as in 
the judgment the subject must not be isolated from the predicate 
that is attributed to it (which ought not to be regarded as able 
to be isolated either), so thought cannot be regarded as really 
distinct from what it qualifies as intelligible. 

Here we are once again up against the problem of the non- 
intelligible. In what sense can thought reject it and exclude it 
from itself? If it excludes it does it not convert itself into a term 
(into a thing)? This links up with several of the oldest and most 
serious problems of philosophy. On what conditions can a 
thought be exclusive without becoming external to itself? (Since 
the outside of self coincides with the inside of self in the order of 
thought, cf. above). There is a sense in which, as was to be fore- 
seen, exclusion is impossible; it is for this reason that thought, 


II2 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


from the moment it is posited, posits itself as by right comprehen- 
sive of everything. 


April 28th 


To-day I would like to ask myself in what measure this general 
theory allows us to resolve or to suppress certain particular 
problems. 

There is one at least that seems to me to collapse, it is what 
can be called the general problem of the relations of thought 
and of the extended, since we have seen that exteriority is not 
expansion, the manifestation of an internal power, but the con- 
dition outside of which thought cannot define itself for itself. 
If this is so, the problem no longer exists, there can no longer 
be question of a localisation of thought; but we find ourselves 
in the presence of this fact, that a thought cannot be defined 
for itself as thought, unless it has previously appeared to itself as 
plunged in exteriority. Far from there being incompatibility 
between one and the other moment, there is thus an internal and 
necessary link. 

Note, moreover, that this relation is still defined in the most 
general and hence the most undetermined way. We end up less 
with a precise solution than with the suppression of a pseudo- 
problem. We are led to say that it is illegitimate to conceive a 
pure thought defined by purely internal characteristics, so as 
subsequently to join it up in an entirely external way with a 
world of exteriority and show how it is impossible that it should 
enter into communication with it. This links up, moreover, with 
Hegel: Das Rein innerliche ist das Rein ausserliche. Thought 
cannot really have an internal content unless it gives it to itself, 
that is to say, unless it mediates that which is given to it as external 
—it is by this mediation of the given that it mediates itself; 
because it begins by being also itself immediate; the immediacy 
of thought is correlative to that of the object. There is nothing 
which is already mediated, which is given as mediated. That 
would be the worst contradiction. And this simple reflection 
is enough to destroy completely the idea of a thought that is 
something already. The point has been admirably grasped by the 
English neo-Hegelians. 

1 Compare the whole Logic of Essence. 


E 113 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


So it is in virtue of an illusion that I oppose myself as thinking 
ego to the spatial reality in which I am plunged and to the ex- 
tended ego that I am. In truth there is an intimate correlation 
between my intelligible reality and my spatial reality that can in 
no way be translated into causal language. 


May 2nd 


But it seems that we are being led to a disastrous dilemma. Either — 
the very notion of thought is abolished so as to make way for 
the notion of a content which organises itself in virtue of some 
kind of internal spontaneity; or else the notion of thought sur- 
vives, but only under the form of a creative disposition, of a sort 
of specific agent for determining the organisation of the content. 
But in reality these two solutions are not distinct. They only 
differ in this: in one instance the mind maintains the duality of 
what organises and what is organised, whereas in the other it 
does not. Yet it remains that in one we seem to end with a sort 
of naturalist mysticism and in the other with an occult formalism. 
Both these solutions are bound to seem extremely vague and even 
suspect. Is it possible to elude them? 

I must repeat once again what we can regard as already esta- 
blished: intelligibility, as constituent of any thought of whatever 
kind, and without which that thought is not, cannot be defined 
apart from some relation to that exteriority (the world of external 
relations) in the surmounting of which the constitutive function 
of thought consists. So I ought to take care not to fall into an 
abstract dualism. Yet it is agreed that a genetic monism, far from 
suppressing the difficulties | am up against, would fall short of 
the problems confronting us. The fruitful connection that its 
intelligibility assures to thought cannot be converted into a 
logical genesis without making nonsense. There is a particular 
kind of physics of dialectical relations which is no more than an 
entirely illegitimate transposition either of real physics or of pure 
speculation. 

Concretely this amounts to saying that we doubtless posit not 
only the empirical impossibility but even the absolute impossi- 
bility of a genetic deduction that claims to reconstitute any in- 
dividual thought whatsoever from the external data (milieu, 
heredity, etc.) which are bound up with the thought in question, 


114 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


and also that we would be falling into absurdity if we set up an 
absolute and radical dualism between the thought considered 
in its essence and the external data. The thought is not a thing 
which can be juxtaposed to other things. Outside these external 
data it cannot be defined for itself, or for a thought which tries 
to understand it. Strictly speaking there is no dualism of the syn- 
thetic act which realises these external data, by mediating them, 
and the external data themselves. This is perhaps best expressed 
by saying that the external data present a character of ideality; 
that is, they only define themselves from the starting point of 
thought itself (of the whole) as conditions both necessary and 
insufficient, that are conditioned in their turn by that very thing 
that is conditioned by them. They cannot be defined as conditions 
save for reflection that sets out from what they condition. This 
amounts to saying that the relation of condition to conditioned 
tends here to pass into its contrary, and to negate itself so as to 
posit itself not as logical constitutive expression, but merely 
as subjective reflection. 

An individual thought thus seems to be revealed to us as that 
which is anterior to its conditions, or, more exactly, that which is 
beyond the conditional nexus. This amounts to thinking a non- 
causal unity of individual thought and of the world of exteriority 
into which it is plunged. 

But in this way am I not led to the neo-Hegelian monist 
idea of an absolute which manifests itself at one and the same time 
in individual thought and in that which, for such thought, 
_ functions as external world—in which the reality of the one and 
the other resides, in their very unity, and the psuedo-ideas of the 
ego and of the external world are suppressed in the efficacious 
and concrete identity of the absolute? This, for me, is the critical 
point. Does the theory of intelligibility that I am defending 
oblige me to posit such an identity? 

I will not ask yet if such identity and unity are thinkable. 
The first question that comes up is whether they are required by 
my notion of the intelligible, and whether they are even com- 
patible with it. 

It is clear in the first place that this unity cannot be called 
intelligible in the sense I have defined. Indeed it is transcendent 
in relation to the connection that defines intelligibility; if you 


115 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


like, it is not intelligible but supra-intelligible. Yet is this unity 
anything more than a pure fiction, the product of an act by which 
the mind realises the dynamic connection in which we have seen 
the very soul and life of thought? Its aim is once and for all to 
cement from without two abstract and juxtaposed elements; ele- 
ments which, as we already know, are only fictitious entities. 
It will be objected that this is precisely what the monists contend; 
the elements are abstractions from the concrete and living whole 
that is reality itself. But that can only be maintained if the whole 
in question is itself thought as intelligible, as co-extensive with 
the intelligible; and there we have precisely what I am aiming at. 
Here the dialectic of the relations of the intelligible and the real 
can be inserted. 


May 4th 

It thus seems to me that at this point we find the link between 
the theory of the intelligible and the theory of faith. Yet there 
is one point that is not yet clear to me. We have seen on 
the one hand that pure thought can only be defined concretely 
by its connection with a world of exteriority, and on the other 
that such a connection ought not to be realised in a metaphysical 
or substantial unity. I am going to try to illustrate this concretely 
so as to make the problem clearer. 

Inasmuch as I am intelligible, inasmuch as I am an intel- 
lectual centre, I can only define myself in function of the external 
world extended in space and time to which at first sight I might 
be tempted to oppose myself. This apparent contingence of the — 
world (of the spatial and temporal data of my experience) in 
relation to a substantial and non-temporal pseudo-truth of myself, 
is shown to be purely illusory. I only understand myself when I 
have discovered that I am only myself by the interiorisation 
(assimilation) of the so-called contingent data; when I have 
discovered that it is by a pure fiction that I can think myself as 
identical in the womb of a radically different empirical content. 
There we have a first point that is quite clear. But the question 
of thinking that intimate connection itself still remains. One 
way of thinking it, which consists in seeing in myself the product 
of the external data conceived as cause, cannot stand up to re- 
flection. Indeed, when it thinks itself as product my thought 


116 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


ceases to regard itself as an intelligible, it juxtaposes itself ideally 
to the other things of the world, it sets aside precisely that 
which obliged it to make the external world enter into its own 
definition, it negates itself. 

(We must recognise that this ends up in a problem, for 
thought, inasmuch as it is bound to the external world, needs to 
grasp itself in my body which, in its turn, can only appear to 
thought as entirely produced, entirely determined from without 
—which would seem to justify pure mechanism—and as or- 
ganised inasmuch as it translates thought itself.) 

As the dualism is unacceptable for reasons that I have already 
explained, thought reaches the point of positing a non-causal 
unity of the world and of itself, and there lies the real meaning 
and strongest justification of monism conceived as a doctrine 
of identity. I appear to myself as bound up with the world by 
the fact that we derive it and me from an identical act by which 
the absolute begets itself—I have elsewhere developed at length 
the motives for which I cannot accept this theory, which fails to 
make the absolute intelligible. 

But what then? Would it be a solution to say that this purely 
ideal connection of thought and of an external world is sufficient 
for itself, and to treat the need felt by the mind to find a basis 
for the connection as illusory? I am not sure that there is a real 
solution there. It would amount to denying the metaphysical 
unity of thought and the world, of affirming in consequence that 
that is a problem that cannot be stated in metaphysical terms. 
But this requires elucidation. What meaning can be ascribed to 
this denial? It seems to me susceptible of taking on a profound 
significance. Given the purely ideal connection between what, 
so as to simplify things, I shall call the centre and the content, 
a connection in virtue of which the centre is only itself through 
the content (cf. all I have already said) it is not possible, it is 
even radically pointless to pretend to ensure an ontological foun- 
dation for this connection; the purely ideal connection in question 
will in no way be reinforced or affirmed because we place below 
it a sort of substantial or extra-logical basis. But in that case is 
the problem really suppressed? 

What really happens is (this is the nerve of my present 
thinking and something which I do not think anyone has yet 


117 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


said), that we are in an order in which truth (in the sense of 
eindeutige Bestimmung) is no longer possible. The connection 
as I have defined it, grasped in its purity, is something that cannot 
in any way be determined as truth in that it cannot be conceived 
causally. The very idea of a purely logical causality would vanish 
when examined, because it would destroy itself for the benefit 
of monism. And in that way the negative solution of a moment 
ago is shown to be illusory and even contradictory; for it would 
still present the character of wanting to be a solution, an answer, 
a truth, while its merit precisely consists in bringing to light 
the impossibility of such a truth. When I elevate myself to the 
level of speculative thought, when at the same time and in conse- 
quence I become aware of the fact that I am nothing outside the 
whole of the external relations that define the content of my ex- 
perience, I discover that no truth can be disentangled from that 
intimate connection between the whole in question and myself; 
it would be as arbitrary on my part to think of myself as creating 
myself through my experience as to think myself as begotten, 
as produced by the content. In both cases I fall into a realism 
that is quite indefensible. 

There is no need to explain at length why this attitude cannot 
be called sceptical. Either scepticism is only confusion, or else 
it is defined in relation to a truth that is at least ideally posited. 
Whereas here I see clearly that no truth about myself is possible. 


May 5th 


I take up once more the point at which the previous process of 
argument ended. Doubtless I cannot define myself as a centre 
save posteriorly to my experience and in function of it; but 
on the other hand no explanation of myself as centre is possible 
—I transcend any possible explanation of my own reality. It 
may be tempting to say: “Doubtless you cannot explain your- 
self to yourself; but for someone else there is no such impos- 
sibility. Each of us can think himself, ought to be able to think 
himself as possible object for an ideal historian.”’ If this were so 
the historian might well be myself; for historical thought is 
outside the sphere in which the relations of the self and the other 
subsist; it is objective thought in general. Yet it is clear that I 
cannot be my own historian: such a history of myself would be a 


118 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


veritable act of creation by which the historical object (that I 
wished to be for myself) would destroy itself (by transforming 
itself). Here there is an instructive and singular point that ought 
to incite us to reflect. The ego appears to us as that which by 
essence cannot treat itself as object without transcending that 
objectivity. But is this a deficiency of the ego in relation to a 
thought in general? In the sense that thought in general, by apply- 
ing itself to an individual thought, could find its constitutive 
law—a law indeterminable for that thought inasmuch as it applies 
itself to itself? This would amount to admitting a certain exterio- 
rity of thought in general in relation to individual thought; and 
much more: a certain eccentricity of thought in relation to itself, 
for we know that thought in general is only defined by its con- 
nection with an experience, hence as individual thought. But 
this has no meaning: if thought in general appeared to us pre- 
viously as eccentric in relation to individual thought, it was in- 
asmuch as it was thought as bound up with another individual 
thought (which in its turn cannot be thought as objective for 
itself). Inasmuch as thought in general is necessarily bound up 
with an individual thought, and all individual thought implies 
the deficiency that I have said, it is clear that thought in general 
possesses no character, no intrinsic privilege to save it from 
contradiction. I will never be a historical object save for a thought 
which in its turn cannot be object forjitself. 


May 6th 


Possibly the foregoing process of argument is not absolutely 
valid as it stands; I have not sufficiently emphasised the fact 
that, as centre, as intelligible, I transcend the conditions on 
which I am trying to make my own reality depend. 

But in this ‘there is nothing that is really essential to what 
concerns us. What matters is this: inasmuch as I elevate myself 
to the intelligible, inasmuch as I constitute myself as centre 
(and we know that this, far from being an isolated and so to 
speak abstract step, implies the act by which I progressively 
interiorise my experience) I progressively transcend the sphere 
of begettings and explanations. Just as a work of art cannot in 
any way explain itself, and has no connection with what there 
is essential in causal determinations, so individual thought, inas- 


119 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


much as it is realised more and more as mind, is liberated from 
the causal order. Supposing it be said that the Idea, that is to 
say the teleological principle towards which this movement of 
thought tends, can only be thought as limit? But it is clear that 
the movement itself implies the positing of the Idea, and the Idea 
can in no way be treated as the fictitious asymptote of a curve 
that would not require it. 

Thus it seems that it would be idle to try to explain the 
movement by which the mind makes itself mind; this movement 
cannot be regarded as caused any more than a dialectical process 
can. And it is in this fundamental sense that to think mind is to 
think freedom, that to will oneself as mind is to will oneself 
and posit oneself as freedom. Only, let me repeat it once again, 
the internal movement by which the mind is created is only 
made possible through the link to a world of exteriority in which 
all is explainable, all is caused; and it is in this sense that freedom 
absolutely implies necessity. This means that the idea of freedom 
becomes fictitious as soon as it is realised in a world external, 
so to speak, to the external world. 

But there are still many points outstanding. To begin with, 
as is clear, freedom thus defined is not a property, a character; 
moreover, and this is still more important, it is not legitimate 
to look on progress in liberty (or in intelligibility) as progress 
in being. 

A free being is no more possible than a thinking thing. I 
am free in the measure in which I negate myself as thing; Iam only 
free being, free thing, for external reflection which purely and 
simply juxtaposes what I am inasmuch as external, to the act by 
which I make myself mind. 

Yet I wonder what the limits are within which this can be 
stated. Will not freedom end up by being identified with that 
knowledge by which individual thought in some measure strips 
all nature so as to plunge itself into the multiple reality of its 
object? | 

There we have one of the directions of my thought. If, in fact, 
far from freedom being excluded by the reality (that is to say, 
the legality) of the external world, it so to speak requires that 
reality, and if mind realises itself in the measure in which the 
world becomes more real for it—i.e. its action on the world is 


I20 > 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


farther extended—am I not tending towards the idea that the 
sovereign reality of the mind would be fulfilled in its own very 
dissolution, that is in the fulfilment of the work of knowledge 
and when all subjectivity vanishes in complete science? 

Yet it is against this possible conclusion that my criticism is 
arrayed. My work ought to tend to show that the theory of intel- 
__ ligibility that I have recently laid down, does not imply scientific 
realism but excludes it. 

Here I must recapitulate the points that have been established. 
The movement of the mind (a constitutive movement) is orien- 
tated towards what I shall call the elimination of the pure causal, 
that is to say, the assimilation, the interiorisation of what in it 
remains crude, the basis of external relationships (it is not, as can 
be seen, a question of the mystical and abstract negation of those 
relations, but of their teleological utilisation). Here I come back to 
the Platonic way of stating the problem. But, in consequence, 
we must raise the question of the relation of the soul to the Ideas 
(the soul being conventionally defined as subject of that becoming, 
that creation of self which is mind—according to this the soul is 
in some way the matter of the mind, is what the mind finds in 
itself). Thus viewed the soul appears to be the basis of willing, 
the mind to be the transcendent and fulfilled unity of willing, 
or again as ideal end which itself wills itself and hence affirms 
itself as real—And if such were the case the soul would be no 
more than an abstract moment of the dynamic and autonomous 
complexus that is mind, an abstract moment, moreover, only 
thinkable as correlative with the body or with the physical 
machine. 

This leads to the recognition that there is no reason to deny 
that the soul can have a nature, while the idea of the nature of the 
mind is contradictory in itself. 

It may be objected that the distinction between the soul and 
the mind is entirely arbitrary, that what we call mind is only the 
natural efflorescence of the soul. But I reply that this theory 
cannot be refuted with a genetic description: for the important 
question here is whether an objective begetting is here thinkable. 
Now the intelligible, as I pointed out, is defined in relation to 
the radical elimination of the pure causal: there is no objective 
derivation of the intelligible (as such). Once again the example 


E* I21 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of the work of art will help to throw light on what is too abstract 
in the theory. If we adopt a genetical standpoint, the notion of 
mind loses all meaning and all content; but the important point 
lies in asking by what right, and in the name of what metaphysical 
realism, we are able to affirm the exclusive value of this point 
of view. From the moment we have grasped what mind is, the 
problem of the origin of mind becomes, not merely insoluble, but 
as impossible as that of squaring the circle. 

But can we give the soul the benefit of a solution which only 
has to do with the mind? It seems to me clear that we cannot. 
We must realise the gravity of the problem raised if we are really 
to speak of the nature of the soul. It is precisely Plato’s problem 
and Plato resolved it through the idea of the Fall. As an objective 
(or genetic) solution is impossible, can we have recourse to a 
dialectical solution? But we have already seen the narrow limits 
within which such a solution can be regarded as valid. The mind, 
inasmuch as it speculates or reflects on itself, appears to itself 
as that which only exists in its relation with exteriority, that 
which is only able to be isolated from exteriority by an abstraction. 
From this standpoint the soul appears to the mind as the condi- 
tion not only of its realisation but also of its reality. Thus the 
genuine realisation of the mind implies the suppression of the 
dualism of the mind and the soul. But is this suppression merely 
ideal? At this point are we going to see the reappearance of the 
opposition between a purely ideal unification anda real difference? 
I do not think so. For the mind is defined by the negation of the 
difference between the ideal and the real (provided that this 
difference is posited as an object of willing); mind is mind inas- 
much as it maintains that negation. This amounts to saying that 
the mind only zs on condition that it is realised. Thus the dualism 
of the soul and the mind only subsists for the mind inasmuch as 
the mind becomes aware of what is unfinished, unrealised and 
so to speak potential in itself. There is no truth as regards this 
dualism in the sense that the mind, inasmuch as it affirms itself 
as mind, denies it. “But,” it may be said, “what value can that 
affirmation have? Ought not the mind to appear to itself as some- 
thing in the process of becoming, something that rises painfully 
out of animal life? Does not the suppression in question belong, 
for mind, to the order of what is yet to come, what will be 


I22 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


but is not yet?” Clearly this interpretation would suppose the 
denial of all that I have said. 


May 7th 


From the speculative standpoint I think the notion of progress 
is one of the least useful that can be found. It implies a realism 
regarding time that excludes the concrete notion of the mind. All 
spiritual progress has as principle and as very reality a unity 
that surpasses it. Because the Bergsonian theory disregards this 
it conjures spirituality away. But we must recognise that the 
mind cannot realise itself save as will for itself; the mind is by 
essence that which cannot be given as a datum to itself, it is its 
own end (it is what I have called a dynamic autonomous com- 
plexus). It only zs on condition that it wills itself; ie. that it is 
not content in itself and is not immobilised. This may oblige 
us to raise a difficult problem: when the mind seeks itself and 
tends towards realisation, does it not make for the destruction 
of that willing which is co-substantial with it? I shall examine 
this later on. 

Spiritual reality thus only zs on condition it negates itself as 
existence. Hence the soul appears to the mind as the inert residue 
of its activity. This is why what can be called activism seems to 
end up in pure pessimism. For what is this willing that leaves 
nothing behind it, and tends towards its own suppression? If it 
is not something deposited and preserved is not value a pure 
illusion? Or is there a zone outside the consciousness that the 
mind has of itself (and only has of itself when it wills itself, that 
is, when it denies what is ‘crude’ in itself), a zone “in which 
prayers bear fruit.” 

Here, I think, we are on one of the roads that lead to religion. 
Because for mind to be a second condition is necessary. It is that 
mind should be able to affirm that it has value. And here we see 
the reappearance of the notion of individuality. 

I take up once more here the principal points that we can look 
on as gained. 

We saw the soul as the matter, or to use a more precise term, 
the medium of the mind. But the mind only is (that is to say, 
only is for itself) inasmuch as it acts, that is, acts on the soul. 
(Yet here a difficulty arises, to which we will need to return; 


123 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL Be 


is the mind incapable of acting immediately on the external 
world?) Such action is in a sense immanent, in that the mind is 
realised by the action itself; but on the other hand the exteriority 
of the soul in relation to the acting principle (I am sorry to 
employ such an inadequate terminology) is a necessary condition, 
for such action should be real. Thus the soul ought to appear 
to the mind as being a datum given to it (in the sense in which 
nature is a datum), but also and more profoundly as in some way 
the material condition under which alone the mind can assume 
a reality for itself. Or rather, to avoid presenting the mind and 
the soul as things juxtaposed, the mind is defined by the very 
act that posits the soul at one and the same time as datum and 
as material condition of that act. We have to recognise that, 
however we look on it, we cannot avoid the idea of an act by 
which the mind posits itself; and it appears, moreover, as if the 
soul as I have defined it is itself function of this act. 

The problem of the relations of the soul and the body is only 
really raised when thought becomes conscious of itself. Only we 
must note that for thought that is fully conscious of itself, that 
problem, by the very fact of assuming all its acuteness, ends up 
by losing all meaning; at least this happens inasmuch as the mind, 
which is constructed, as I have said, by overcoming exteriority, — 
far from being capable of maintaining objectively determinable 
relations with exteriority, in some way absorbs exteriority into 
itself. This goes to show that a philosophy of mind should be 
careful to distinguish between the pseudo-problem that I have 
just disposed of (it collapses as soon as we grasp that the mind 
could not be in relation with anything else) and the quite different. 
problem that concerns the relations of the body with the soul— 
the latter being defined as the material of spiritual action. Yet we 
must recognise that this distinction scarcely seems to bring us 
any nearer our solution: for either the soul implies consciousness, 
and we are up against the insoluble problem of the soul; or it 
does not imply consciousness, and the “insoluble” problem 
arises in a zone intermediary between the two zones that I have 
just distinguished. So my elucidation still seems to be very 
insufficient. 

What helps to obscure the problem is, I feel, the fact that 
the notion of body is not at all univocal. We really need to take 


124 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


into account the way in which the notion of body varies cor- 
telatively with the notion of the soul. The definition of the body 
as a mechanical complexus is one of the mind’s modes of realisa- 
tion. Of course this does not mean that the mind begets the body 
(even ideally); for the mind is only constituted as knowing when 
it thinks the known as a datum anterior to the act of knowing. 
But, for all that, the mode of representation of the relations of 
the soul and the body which depends on the way in which the 
body itself is thought, also depends indirectly on that very move- 
ment by which the mind is realised in knowledge. In other words, 
(if we only envisage the body) the notion that the mind can 
form of the relations of the soul and body must be in function 
of the movement by which the notion of body is constructed. 
Now this construction of the body is shown to be bound up 
in an extraordinarily close way with the construction of the ex- 
ternal world itself. Can we say, then, that there is a construction 
of the soul in the sense in which there is a construction of the body 
(the notion of the relations of the soul and the body would result 
immediately from bringing these two constructions together)? 
It seems to me that as soon as we have clearly distinguished the 
soul and the mind we are obliged to answer this question nega- 
tively. It is certainly not possible to define a movement in which 
the notion of the soul is elaborated in a way parallel to the 
movement by which the notion of body is defined—and on this 
point Kantian criticism should be regarded as entirely valid 
(indeed Kant perhaps did not draw all the conclusions from this 
that he might have done). 

We have to set out from the principle, I think, that, whether 
we consider it as desiring or as perceiving, the soul is not think- 
able, if not definable, outside all relations with the external 
world. 


May 8th 


Clearly we are here in full confusion. Only one point seems 
plain to me; it is, as I have already pointed out, that our con- 
ception, our representation of the relations of the body and the 
soul depends closely on the conception we form of the nature of 
the body. The parallelist representation, for instance, is in function 
of the mechanicist conception of the body; which means that 


125 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


parallelism does not remain true at successive stages of the evo- 
lution of the notion of body. 

In other words there is no ground for positing dogmatically 
the possibility of a unique relation which would remain valid for 
modes of representation of the body (or of the soul) that are in 
themselves absolutely distinct; such a relation is itself function 
of the modes of representation. Parallelism is only valid from 
the standpoint of a mechanical representation of the body, and 
it implies, I think, a representation of the nature of the soul 
which cannot be regarded as absolute. 

I insist for the moment on these very general and very 
indeterminate propositions. We can see immediately the problem 
they force us to raise: are these multiple representations of the 
relation of the soul and of the body contingent in relation to a 
reality to which they “approximate” ever more closely? It is 
clear that this presupposes another question, namely, what is 
the reality of the body? (I still leave aside the question of the soul.) 
If the body has a substantial reality, that amounts to saying that 
one (and one only) representation of the body exists—a represen- 
tation which coincides with its object and of which the other 
representations are only images, inexact transpositions. This real 
representation would necessarily imply a mode of figuration, 
also real, of the union of the soul and the body (the figuration 
being also converted into object). Thus the problem of the reality 
of the body is shown to be the central problem and upon its 
solution everything else depends. It is important to state this 
problem in terms that are as explicit as possible, and I will 
formulate it thus: under what conditions is it possible to define 
a reality of the body in relation to which any other representation 
of the body must be said to function as appearance? When 
thus stated the problem solves itself. The conditions under which 
a reality can be defined as such for us can only be of a rational, 
intelligible order. 

Thus the monist theory of the relation of the soul and the 
body can only have an absolute value if the representation of the 
body on which it is based can be regarded as real. Here it must be 
noted that the theory is not univocal; it can either think the 
body as identical with the soul (on condition that it defines the 
body as non-extended), or it can think the body as being the 


126 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


extended aspect of one and the same reality which is also soul 
inasmuch ‘as it perceives itself as non-extended. One of these 
interpretations can be preferred to the other only if we accept 
an ontological value superior to the notion of the body. 

But if it is true that such an ontological value can never be 
absolute (in the sense that the transition from the intelligible to 
the real is always and everywhere critical) it seems to me that 
we must conclude that no metaphysical judgment bearing on the 
relations of the soul and the body is valid. This amounts to 
saying that we cannot even think a real and fixed formula, that of 
this relation, to which we can “approximate” ever closer indefi- 
nitely. I admit that this seems to be in contradiction to expe- 
rience; it seems, indeed, to amount to saying that the relation 
of the soul to the body is not objectively determinable; whereas 
the existence of numerous psycho-physical constants appears to 
militate in favour of the opposite thesis. Only it is clear that all 
that I have said so far is entirely applicable to the soul. If 
the soul is conceived asa. substantial unity, as a dynamic centre, 
it is only too clear that what I could call the parallelistic index 
is not properly applicable to the relation thought between the 
soul and the body. Are we able to deny outright that the soul 
is such a unity or such a centre? In the measure in which it passes 
beyond pure phenomenalism, voluntarism does not seem to be 
in a position to dispense entirely with that notion. Thus on the 
plane on which the soul is so conceived, parallelism is shown 
to be unthinkable. But what metaphysical value can be accorded 
to psycho-physical constants? Can we really say that they show 
a fundamental and definite connection in a univocal way? 


END OF PART ONE 


127 


= 
ore 
A 
p 2 
Sed 
; 
- 


# 


PART TWO 


It is private life that holds out the mirror 
to infinity; personal intercourse, and that 
alone, that ever hints at a personality be- 
yond our daily vision. 


'E. M. FORSTER, Howard’s End. 


September 15th, 1915 
Time has not and cannot have any origin save the present which 
is the only boundary that can be assigned to it. . . . The illusion 
that time is given before it is consumed (as space which is there 
before it is traversed). Would it not be true to say that time is 
only in act, and space only in potency? Time cannot be compared 
with a medium into which consciousnesses are inserted, a medium 
in relation to which such ‘insertions’ are contingent. It is the 
very negation of that. 

Yet time’s internal boundary, which is its very reality, 
appears to the imagination as moving—in the heart of what? 
It is in this way that the idea of time as medium is born. 


September 18th, 1915 
Time cannot be thought as object without space; but space can 
only be a datum given in time. 

We symbolise time by movement—and movement is itself 
symbolised by space traversed. But in that way we are setting 
aside the essential element which, for lack of a better word, I call 
actuality (corresponding to hicceity). 


October 15th, 1915 


The possibility of divination is bound up with the nature (not the 
degree) of the interest which attaches thought to its ideal object. 
But on the other hand, as is plain, an objective dynamic of 


129 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


interest is in itself impossible. Interest needs to be rea/—and this 
cannot be expressed in the language of quantity. To express it 
better, the mind needs to participate totally in the interest (mere 
curiosity remains isolated in the midst of pre-occupations that it 
does not suppress). The essential point is thus the relation of the 
idea in tension to the mind itself. 


April 2nd, 1916 

This morning, on a clear and marvellous springtime day, I 
glimpsed that the notions of so-called ‘occult’ knowledge, 
against which ‘reason’ claims to revolt, are in reality at the root 
of the commonest day to day experiences which we take for 
granted: the experiences of feeling, of will or of memory. Who 
would be prepared to question that the will ‘acts’ as suggestion, 
as magical suggestion? And what are bodies if not apparitions 
or materialisations? Does not the experience of memory imply 
the real and effective negation of time? It is all obvious—too 
obvious for the twilight condition of our psychology. 


April 13th 
Without question I am inclining to the belief that the central 
puzzles of psychology, those that our actual knowledge (with 
its apparent prudence made up principally of laziness and pusil- 
lanimity) tries to muzzle with conventions and postulates (I am 
thinking especially of parallelism here) could only be solved from 
an entirely extra or infra-psychological standpoint. Thus, far from 
needing to be conceived as a purely abstract relation between 
worlds that do not communicate at all, the mysterious relation 
between the internal and the external is perhaps a centre—an 
essential fact in relation to which these worlds are only abstrac- 
tions. This view is certainly to be found in neo-Platonism and, 
even more plainly, in Bergson. But has Bergson grasped that he 
has been led towards something which is not psychology—which 
is beyond psychology? Admittedly he sees the body in terms of 
materialisation, but has he sufficiently grasped all that this in- 
volves? There is still something timid about his attitude. The 
same applies (even more clearly) to his profound and unintel- 
ligible theory of recollection. 

What does ‘to conserve’ mean? The idea of conservation 


130 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


implies that of synchronism, or, more exactly, that of parallel 
durations. Something that is conserved is something that persists 
at the same time as something else that serves as its datum. By 
parallel durations I understand that corresponding with the state 
of one of these objects in presence there is always a synchronised 
state of the other object, and that the observation brought to 
bear on this other state does not beget it. When he speaks of the 
conservation of pure recollections, Bergson postulates that the 
idea of parallel durations is applicable to the body and to recol- 
lection, which amounts to saying that recollection is present 
(whether it is actualised or not); in other words that the actual- 
isation is as contingent in relation to the memory actualised as the 
objective observation of an event is contingent in relation to 
that event... . 


April 14th 

The problem could be formulated this way. Given any plurality 
of temporal series, are they so related that, for every break made 
in one of them we can theoretically find a corresponding and 
synchronised break in all the others? 

The solution, it seems to me, is to be found by going into the 
idea of determination. If these series bear on determinations that 
are homogeneous in relationship to one another, then it is certain 
that the synchronism is possible. But the problem loses all 
meaning if the determinations are not homogeneous. To be 
examined further. 


May 4th 
‘Realised’ this evening with prodigious lucidity: 

1. That sensation (immediate consciousness) is infallible, 
that there is no place in it for error. 

2. That in this way faith ought to participate in the nature 
of sensation (the metaphysical problem here lies in rediscovering, 
by thought and beyond thought, a new infallibility, a new 
immediacy). 

3. That the immediacy of sensation is of necessity a paradise 
lost. The dialectic and drama of sensation is that it has to be 
reflected, interpreted—it is thus that error becomes possible. 
Error makes its entry into the world with reflection. But 


131 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


non-reflected sensation falls short of the plane of the fallible. 

The question is whether intellection on the plane of thought 
participates in the immediate infallibility of sensation. Funda- 
mentally all reflection is invincibly attracted by that which 
suppresses it—by that in which it is negated. 


May 14th 

I realised to-day in an impressive though confused way that the 
reality of bodies is and only can be a reality of interposition; 
bodies are mutually interposed or interpose themselves. The 
function of the body is at one and the same time to bind together 
and to separate. But what does it bind? What does it separate? 
There is a complete mystery here; the data of common sense and 
of scientific knowledge are clearly insufficient. All that I can see 
is this: What binds together (or what separates) ought to be in 
some way homogeneous in relation to what is bound. Hence 
thought cannot conceive the body, for instance, as binding to- 
gether the psychic and the spatial. It only binds thought to the 
world of space inasmuch as thought is position (this is extremely 
obscure), or again inasmuch as the external world escapes from 
space—which is not clear either. We must go further. If the body 
binds the spatial in the sense that it is itself spatial, it can only 
bind the psychic to the psychic inasmuch as it is psychical, 


inasmuch as it is charged with meaning, and itself is meaning. . . . 


January, 1917 
Atheism is theodicy upside down, an apologetics that has gone 
WYOND.G.c vs 

All the judgments made on God by man fall back on to 
man’s own head. “Thou art not’ is man’s verdict: but what of 
the verdict-maker—is he? 


February, 1917 


Notes on immortality. 

It seems to me definite that two hypotheses, or rather two 
attitudes and two only, are possible regarding the problem of 
immortality (and this, of course, is the inner meaning of the last 
scene of Porte-Glaive!). The first is the attitude I still took two 


1 The early version of Z’Jconoclaste. 


132 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


years ago, Abel’s attitude, to which I may possibly return: viz. 
that there is no truth of immortality, that by definition im- 
mortality falls outside any possible verification. Verification 
brought to bear on the beyond brings it down to the plane of 
earth; thus immortality is only Ay and for faith: the spiritual order 
is such that we are bound to think it as transcending the accidents 
of matter; we only participate in the spiritual order on condition 
we think in this way . . . belief in immortality like belief in 
God is involved in the very act of our freedom. Only we must 
recognise that in this form the statement is ambiguous. Is this 
spiritual order anything other than the eternity of the Ideas? 
Whereas the farther I proceed the more I am convinced that the 
problem of immortality has to be stated in personal terms. The 
conservation of values of which Héfiding speaks does not amount 
to very much—I am not even really sure that those words have 
any meaning. Either I postulate legitimately, but what I affirm 
is only an abstract and empty principle—or else I affirm some- 
thing which is a fact in spite of everything; and have I the right 
to postulate that? This question occurred to me years ago: under 
what conditions and within what limits is pure thought able to 
postulate? Clearly the idea of fact here is still very obscure. Can 
I say that future life is a fact—a fact, moreover, as uncertain 
as the journey I am to make, or not to make, next summer? How 
can we escape from this imprudent realism without involving 
ourselves in a system of statements that have no content? I tried 
to get beyond this dilemma by having recourse to love and by 
saying that ‘love wishes for the eternity of its object.’ But this 
is perhaps another equivocation; doubtless the lover posits the 
reality of the beloved as outside and above time but . . . we 
are up against the problem of the Palais de Sable, and it is tragic. 
It seems to me that there is a sort of mysterious and extremely 
profound answer in prayer—one that I do not completely grasp. 
To pray is to postulate that the reality of others, though in- 
dependent of me, depends in some degree on the act by which | 
I posit it, that the act contributes in some way to the reality. 
I am convinced that—in the simplest psychological sense—the 
thought of others contributes to our make-up. 

The second attitude, which is much more clear, is that of 
Lodge, and, paradoxical though this may seem, it appears to me 


133 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


at bottom to coincide with that of Leibnitz. Immortality, under- 
stood not in the hyper-idealist sense we were just dealing with, 
but in the realist sense, can only be absolutely personal. The 
Aristotelian thesis seems to me absolutely indefensible, with 
nothing to be said in its favour. I am still a little frightened by 
Lodge’s realism. But I am getting used to it... . 


February 9th, 1917 
A note on telepathy. 


In general any communication between consciousnesses seems 
to imply: 

1. A thought formulated for itself, ie. which becomes 
conscious of itself and communicates with itself. 

2. The conversion of that thought into a material system 
that functions as sign or symbol and obeys the general laws of 
matter. 

3. A medium or agent of transmission of some kind. 

4. The reconversion or retranscription of the initial system 
(or of a system which reproduces it) into a thought. 

5. This thought, more or less identical with the original 
thought, is revealed to the other consciousness. 

From this point of view there is no relevant difference between 
spontaneous expression, ordinary language, and communication 
by letter, telephone and radio. In each case a message has to be 
received by a suitable instrument and retranscribed. 

If we admit the existence of telepathy—which we must do for 
it is beyond discussion—we find ourselves up against something 
entirely new. The difficulty does not lie in the medium or the 
transmitting agent as is often thought, but in this: the cypher, 
the system of conventions that inevitably played its part at the 
departure or arrival of the message, is now lacking: and so it 
looks as though we are not dealing with a message but with a 
vision. This needs to be examined further. It can doubtless be 
objected that there really is a system of conventions but that it 
happens to be one that is totally implicit. But in my opinion this 
is meaningless. Supposing I think something intensely or ex- 
perience a given state—and determine that the thought or state 
shall be transmitted to a friend who is in England. If we insist 
that a message is communicated it must be admitted: 


134 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


1. That my thought is endowed with a special ‘fluescent’ 
power of emission. 

2. That the emission takes place in all directions but that 
the waves are only caught by a being tuned in to me. 

3. That this being is precisely the one to whom I wished 
my message to be transmitted. It would be contrary to the prin- 
ciple set forth at the beginning were I to admit that the receptive 
condition could be determined by consciousness: it must be 
already given and must pre-exist the emission of the message. 

4. That this emission, or rather the organic modification 
produced by it, should itself be retranscribed by the ‘receiver’ 
in terms of consciousness—and this though the receiver lacks 
the cypher (which I also lack), and even has no consciousness 
whatever of the effect produced on his organism by the emission 
in question. 

Who can fail to see that this is a laborious construction, 
a painful and superfluous effort to conceive telepathy in terms of 
a form of correspondence, or of a message, whereas it would be 
infinitely simpler to suppose that the thought of one person is not 
transmitted to the other person but immediately imposed on him. 
And are there not psychological experiences, rare doubtless, but 
undeniable, in which the mind is aware of sharing a thought with 
another; experiences that I should describe as spiritual contact. 
After all it may well be that a given idea is not in its origin my 
idea, that it is in no way ‘private’ and only becomes limited, 
self-attributed and localised at a secondary stage. This locali- 
sation may be due to a sort of internal deficiency of the idea. 
After all an idea is no more capable of being sitwated than is a con- 
sciousness. I was on the point of saying that the less we situate 
ourselves the more we are, but I am not sure that it is true.” 


July 23rd, 1918 
Perhaps emotion is only suppressed action, action that does 
not ‘emerge’. 


1 Nothing would be gained by introducing a mediating consciousness that intervenes 
between my consciousness and that of my friend; for the same question would come up, 
namely how I communicate with the mediator, etc. . . . 

2 The above becomes clearer as soon as we compare consciousness with ideas in a 
consciousness that can be placed in immediate relations with one another in the event of 
given determining circumstances. 


13} 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


An interesting suggestion: may it not be that between a 
determined present and certain futures there is the same con- 
nection as that established in a creative imagination between ideas 
that are discovered at the same time and in some way linked 
together, yet are destined to be exploited only successively (e.g. 
the scenes of a play for which, at one and the same time, I dis- 
cover my first act and a scene of the fifth). In other words, 
between the (Bergsonian) idea of a universe that is pure impro- 
visation and the idea of a world unfolding an eternal content 
in time, is no intermediary conception possible? Prediction 
would, strictly speaking, thus be conceivable, though we would 
not therefore be obliged to believe in complete historical pre- 
determination. From this standpoint there would be situations 
that implied one another up to a certain point, and yet this 
implication would permit the subsistence of 4/anks of some sort 
between them (as there are dlanks in a story of which we only 
know the beginning, one or two preliminary episodes, and— 
perhaps—the end). I do not deny that this hypothesis raises 
difficulties—notably that of thinking the concrete moments of 
history as non-homogeneous to one another because of their very 
unequal potential of implication. There is a possible comparison 
here with the unequal potential of development given to principal 
themes and secondary themes in a symphony. This, though 
perhaps difficult for a metaphysician, is plain to a historian or a 
psychologist. It cannot be contested, for instance, that some dates 
are critical. 

We also need to ask how an initial situation can bring about 
an ulterior situation—yet not the intermediary situations. Yet the 
psychology of imagination shows us that the thing is possible. 
And it is even worth asking whether the ulterior situation (which 
though not yet actual in the historical sense is actual meta- 
physically) does not itself determine the circumstances which, 
historically, seem to determine it. I have a clear feeling that, 
strange though it may seem, this hypothesis may give us a better 
understanding of what history is. 

Another difficulty lies in the fact that what I call the situation 
certainly cannot be reduced to the consciousness one of the 
‘actors’ has of it, nor to the sum of the consciousnesses of the 


1 More exactly, governed one another. 


136 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


actors; for in this order no ‘adding up’ or ‘integration’ is possible. 
The unity of the situation appears to those ‘involved’ in it as 
essentially being a datum given, but at the same time as something 
that permits of and even calls for their active intervention. Notice 
that this is true of every act of reflection (of thought) of whatever 
kind. Here we have something that is inherent in the funda- 
mentally ambiguous notion of ‘oneself’. I, for myself, am a 
situation that surpasses me and excites. my activity. ... And 
the unconscious is no more than the symbol of the transcendence 
of the situation in relation to the situated. It may be objected 
that, in spite of everything, the situation becomes an object for 
reflected consciousness: but on deeper reflection it becomes plain 
that the situation is not capable of being objectivised entirely. 
Were it entirely objective for me, it would cease to be mine; it is 
only mine by what, as regards me, is still—as I have said else- 
where—‘attached’. But supposing it is said that for God such 
attachments are broken? But it is easy to see that, if God is 
defined in this way, he has nothing to do with me and I have 
nothing to do with him. This God is only a ‘him’ who can 
never become a ‘thou’. God interpreted as impersonal truth is 
the most impoverished of fictions, the improperly realised limit 
of the process in which I become involved when I take my own 
context for object. I would be prepared to say dogmatically 
that every relation of being to being is personal and that the 
relation between God and me is nothing if it is not a relation of 
being with being, or, strictly, of being with itself. The bizarre ex- 
pression that comes to my mind for stating this is that, while an 
empirical ‘thou’ can be converted into a ‘him’, God is the absolute 
‘thou’ who can never become a ‘him’. The meaning of prayer. 
Scientific knowledge only speaks of the real in the third 
person. 

To sum up, this interpretation of history does not imply an 
absolute finalism. There are conditions that are only conditions, 
means that are subordinated to real ends. But, first and foremost, 
this interpretation depends on the idea of a dynamism of the 
situation, which transcends individual destinies though in one 
sense it is only the material for them. This living contradictory 
dualism lies at the very core of the real; all spiritual life is essen- 
tially a dialogue. 

137 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


The scientist sets the relation that binds him to the object 
entirely aside. Just as, when I speak of someone in the third 
person, I treat him as independent—as absent—as separate; or, 
more exactly, I define him implicitly as external to a dialogue 
that is taking place, which may be a dialogue with myself. 
Religious life begins as soon as this relation is transformed. 
All this must be examined more profoundly. There seems to be a 
whole world here that has been but little explored. A judgment 
in the third person is by essence an instructive judgment, whatever 
be the teaching or information that it interprets. . . . 

Under what conditions am I to employ the second person? 
This postulate is the opposite of the postulate I have just men- 
tioned. I use the second person only to address that which I 
regard as susceptible of answering me, whatever form the answer _ 
may take—even if only that of an ‘intelligent silence’. Where 
no answer is possible there is only place for the ‘him’. 

Thus the key is provided by the idea of answer. 

Hence a double relationship of myself with myself. 

Every answer, it seems, is made by means of signs or symbols 
and every sign is an answer to a more or less explicitly formulated 
question. Between the question and the answer there must be a 
meeting ground which, if not selected, is at least accepted—it 
amounts to the same thing—by the question. This implies a 
certain code from which the person who answers can derive the 
elements of the answer; otherwise the answer would fall outside 
the scope of the question and not be an answer. 

What is interrogation? It is an effort to correct a state of 
relative indetermination. Every question implies: 

1. A disjunctive judgment. . 

2. The affirmation that one only of the alternatives is true 
or valid. 

3. The recognition of incapacity to determine which. For 
example: ‘Is it raining?’—either it is or it is not raining, one of the 
alternatives is true, but which? This (in contrast with what can be 
called dialectics) allows us to conceive a mode of communication 
which is not made by means of questions and answers and hence 
is not accomplished by means of signs. As a communication of 
this kind has no reference to any cypher or any code, it must 
necessarily have the appearance of being fortuitous. I would be 


138 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


tempted to give to this kind of communication the name of 
revelation. 

Analysis of the idea of answer. 

Under what conditions is an answer valid? 

To begin with the answer must dear properly on the question, 
in other words the question must have been understood; more- 
over it must bring the specification desired; finally this specifi- 
cation must appear to be founded, not arbitrary—the answerer 
must be assumed to be in a situation that does not permit there 
to be any alternative for him (this, of course, must not be due to 
reflection failing to measure up to the real complexity of the 
situation). 

What does understanding a question mean? First, putting it 
to oneself, placing oneself in the mental situation of the ques- 
tioner. I can only give a full and proper answer to my own 
question. The consciousness of the answerer is the meeting- 
ground of the question and the answer. . . . 

But does not nature answer the questions of the experimental 
scientist? Yes, but only on condition that the encounter I have 
referred to takes place. The experimental scientist has the 
task of eliminating all that could make the answer seem for- 
tuitous or accidental, and not in exact relationship to the question 
as it was asked. Hence the question should be as free from 
ambiguity as possible, for ambiguity in the question results in the 
impossibility of interpreting the answer. In properly conducted 
experiments everything happens as if the question were—could 
not fail to be—understood. 

An answer is only possible in an order in which there are 
alternatives or margins: what I should call the order of the 
either or’s. These alternatives ought to be capable of being indi- 
cated; and it is the business of the answer to emphasise the alter- 
native that must be accepted, and in this sense the answer is 
essentially a sign or symbol. Notice also that it ought to be 
usable; it constitutes an acquisition—something we can make 
use of, at least within certain limits, because we have incorporated 
it. Conversely it could be shown that all knowledge which is 
not an answer must be sterile.1 

The world in which dialectics is possible is thus a world of 
1 And would it be knowledge? 


139 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


differentiated experiences that are susceptible of completing one 
another. In the measure in which I am attached to a moment of 
time and attached to a point of space my experience necessarily 
requires an Erfiillung, that is to say, the mediation of a system 
of questions and answers (in contrast to the order of sentiment 
for which such words have no meaning, and, more generally, 
to what I shall call the order of the manners of being). 

Objectivity is bound up with the existence of a system of 
questions and answers, but conversely such a system supposes 
objectivity. And when I say objectivity I mean the continual 
strengthening of objectivity. For instance, I ask how long it 
takes to go from-Rome to Naples by express. My question implies 
the affirmation that there is a railway connection between Rome 
and Naples and that it requires a definite time to make the journey 
under those conditions. Such a question is given as answered in 
advance in objective fact (what I call the Aim or it), but as only 
capable of receiving this answer by way of dialectics, through 
the medium of a thou; that is to say by coming into communi- 
cation with a wider and complementary experience. And this is 
true for every question that life obliges me to ask. For example: 
what have I done with my watch? I know this question is an- 
swered in objective fact; my watch is somewhere; but I may have 
the opportunity of interrogating someone (a thou) who has seen 
me place it in an unusual place; (and the thou in question may well 
have been half-forgotten to begin with, and then brusquely resur- 
rected from my own experience). The soliloquy is not a simple 
imitation of the dialogue. If it is to bear fruit, every dialogue 
needs at a given moment to become a soliloquy, for unless that 
happens, the coincidence of question and answer would not take 
place. This coincidence can only take place in an understanding; 
indeed it is by the coincidence that the understanding is de- 
fined... . 

This coincidence is in reality a determination, a determination 
of a judgment that was known as undetermined. But does not 
such awareness of self as indeterminate go beyond the limits of 
the simple judgment? Is it not already reflection? . . . A question 
is a reflection in act. But what arouses the reflection? It seems 
bound up with desire or with intention. I would like to consult 
my watch—but I cannot find it. The friction of desire as regards 


140 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the datum obliges me to reflect, or is my reflection in potency: 
reflection is this friction ‘for itself’. Thus every problem implies 
an ‘Ishould . . . butI cannot.’ It is this ‘I should’, and the action 
that is first invoked and then immediately inhibited that it sets 
in motion, which obliges me to observe that ‘I cannot’, that I 
have not the necessary means at my disposal. 

It seems to me that these very elementary observations have 
great importance from the metaphysical point of view. No answer 
is possible unless the question itself is really suppressed as 
question. Every theoretical affirmation is, if I may so put it, 
constructed on a totality of questions and answers, whose detail 
it discards; and, at the same time, it is the point of departure for 
an infinite questionnaire or an infinity of questionnaires. More- 
over, it is only the interest the subject takes in the theoretical 
affirmation that permits him to choose amongst the questions 
to which it gives rise. 

But obviously we are dealing in abstractions. Who asks a 
question? Who answers? . . . It must be noted that the higher we 
are elevated in the theoretical order, the less the meaning of the 
question. The dialectic, so to speak, becomes depersonalised (for 
instance when a metaphysician foresees and discusses an objection 
it is plain that the question Who? is meaningless). But on the 
lower planes of thought the answer zs attached, so to speak, to a 
context that is not made explicit—which it has to set aside. The 
meeting ground is not on the same level (for example when a 
mountaineer says to a townsman: ‘You will be there in five 
minutes’). It must be repeated that levelling-out is a condition 
of any real objectivity (the need for a well-established cypher, 
a 

It is important to note that the question Who? absolutely 
ceases in what Ihave called the soliloquy, on whatever plane it 
be considered (alike on the plane of the hypochondriac who 
interrogates himself about how he is feeling and that of the meta- 
physician who is in dialogue with himself). The / corresponds 
precisely to the refusal to raise the question Who, because it 
would be ‘out of place’. It is only a deeper reflection that can 
cast doubt on the objectivity of this order of answers—which 
still needs to be defined. But there are evidently fields in which 
it is impossible not to ask the question W7ho?—those of the order 


141 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of evidence. Then the question of weight, of guarantee, of 
signature (I repeat, it is only by reflection and by application 
of this method to myself, that I can interrogate myself on the value 
of my own signature!). The who is thus, essentially, a signature, a 
seal, a mark whose value should be, but is not, spontaneously 
called into question. Doubtless the child begins by believing 
what he or she is told. In this case the dialogue is a soliloquy, it 
treats the other person’s answer as an answer in itself, whereas 
the adult—the scientist at least—treats the answer in itself as an 
answer made by another person. The problem of the who is thus 
the problem of credibility, and doubtless in practice it is not 
originally raised unless there is a discordance between the answer 
received and the answer expected. 

The idea of an absolute seal for the answer which would be 
reality itself (the supreme seal, the standard seal). What bears 
this seal is true. The seal will be recognised as conferring 
truth. But here we must be more exact. An ordinary answer 
seems to us to express (exactly or not) that which is. We thus 
suppose a difference between the fact and the answer that bears 
on the fact, and treat the answer as a mediation between zt and us. 
Is this difference ever eliminated? It seems not. In our eyes there 
is always a mediating action. In the case of experimental science 
it is the experiment itself that functions as mediator and inter- 
locutor; for us the fact in question is not a thou but Aim or it. In 
other words it seems that for us reality is something that never 
answers but from which all answers must be derived; even in 
the simple instance of the man who asks his friend how he is. 
Hence a new problem. How does this pure reality, this pure him 
or it, nourish or provoke or even permit of, the answer? The 
most interesting and crucial case arises when the question bears 
on a private experience. I ask someone “Are you content?’ My 
question, in objective fact, is given as answered; the answer is 
going to introduce a determination into my disjunction. The 
‘fact’ is thought as pre-existing the answer and the function of 
the answer seems to consist in liberating it or uttering it. But my 
question, by the fact that it asks for an answer, supposes itself to 
be understood; it implies the postulate that itself and the answer 
will coincide (in this case it implies the identity of the idea of 
1 But by so doing I cease to treat myself as myself. 


142 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


contentedness); thus a question is posited as being exactly re- 
flected in an understanding that confronts the question with the 
fact (the he or it) and utters this in the form of an answer. Clearly 
it is important to define this confrontation. My question makes 
the other person ask himself: ‘Am I content?’ But how will he 
answer himself? How is the pure him or it liberated, so to speak, 
so as to meet the question and answer it? Or, again, how is pure 
experience inserted into the dialectic? It appears as though pure 
experience must be questioned in its turn, must become a thou 
and answer. But are we not involving ourselves in an infinite 
regression? How can the answer of pure experience (manner of 
being) be produced? It seems to me indispensable to note that 
in a particular case it may not necessarily be produced at all. 
Pure experience may refuse to answer. But whether it refuses or 
not it evidently needs, so to speak, to be converted into a person 
who has or has not common ground with the interrogating 
consciousness. At least pure experience is sufficiently capable 
of reflection to recognise whether the common ground exists 
or not. The question, anyway, operates as an appeal, a signal 
that may or may not be received. At this point we need to con- 
sider the instance in which I cannot answer because I do not know. 
The appeal is made, but nothing answers. If on the other hand 
the interlocutor knows, his objective knowledge is converted 
into ‘thou’ who answers. Someone asks me: “When did Descartes 
die?’ I answer: ‘In 1650’. What does that mean? It is not the fact 
that answers (the eternal truth, the pure Aim or it): but the truth 
as transformed in an interlocutor. We have still to ask whether a 
distinction needs to be made between eternal truth and the know- 
ledge of that truth. But this question is not properly stated. All 
this needs to be examined. It is worth noticing that a truth such 
as ‘Descartes died in 1650” or ‘Prague is the capital of Bohemia’ 
cannot be defined other than as an answer to a possible question. 
To say that I know that Prague is the capital of Bohemia is essen- 
tially to say that I am in the position to answer the question: 
‘What is the capital of Bohemia?’ Knowledge, the knowledge of 
someone, can thus only be considered as a totality of answers 
susceptible of being liberated in this or that given situation. 
Real knowledge, of course, is that which can be used in a very 
large number of different situations. But it seems at once illegiti- 


143 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


mate to say that this knowledge is in act, and excessive to main- 
tain that it is only in potency. There is an intermediary notion 
to be found, that is to say, to construct. It is in this sense that to 
know is to be able (I have pointed out that the answer is a sign, 
that is to say a signal susceptible of being utilised and of orien- 
tating action, i.e. in this instance furthering the progress of know- 
ledge). 

I note that linked to the foregoing there are other capital 
questions such as the question of the nature of the effort to 
recollect. I am searching for a name I have forgotten, that is to 
say I am questioning; I can look for the name in a dictionary, 
whose function here is that of mediator between myself and 
reality. I know that my question is answered in fact—for instance 
I cannot think of the name of the author of Rome Sauvée but I 
know that the author exists and has a name. But my appeal to 
myself does not seem to be heard. I only try to recall what I 
know I once knew (that is to say, what I perhaps know). It 
seems that to the initial question there must be something that 
will answer: ‘Here’ or “We have got it’. In a word the appeal is 
addressed to the confused interior multiplicity which is my per- 
manent ‘thou’ (the thou which cannot be converted into a him 
or it unless I call it me, or—to use a monstrous phrase—my me). 
It is from this multiplicity, then, that the first answer seems to 
emanate. And everything happens subsequently as if the interior 
multiplicity searched on my behalf until the moment when 
memory arises and says: ‘It is I.” 

It seems, in a word, that there is an experimental process in 
which the interrogator ceases to take part as soon as he has made 
his appeal. Yet the answer may be immediate.? 

From the dialectical standpoint—which is also the standpoint 
of experience—that is, in a world in which thought progresses 
by means of questions and answers, there can be no pure datum, 
ie. no datum which does not involve or permit of question and 
answer. The immediate, which would be the purely insignificant, 
cannot be inserted anywhere into dialectics, and dialectics—by 
1 Forgotten recollection is mute recollection. Note of 1925. One ought to examine more 


closely what this search consists in. It is a sort of rearrangement of self in function of the 
element that needs bringing to the surface. 


* In this instance rearrangement is superfluous; the interior multiplicity is spontaneously 
organised so that the element asked for is on the surface plane. 


144 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


definition—cannot proceed from it. But it goes without saying 
that we are here dealing with a purely abstract world, a world 
in which enjoyment would be impossible. 

In enjoyment there seems to be an identity of the mediator 
and of the mediatised (far from only being its expression, the thou 
is confounded with the Aim or zt); I am in communication! with 
_ the thing itself and not with a symbol for the thing, but because 
- of that the thing ceases to be the thing in the theoretical sense, 
it ceases to be translated by a sign. It is in this sense that art, like 
love, is revelation; it implies a gift. Now in the realm of the pure 
him or it” there could. be no question of a gift. In this way light 
is thrown on the nature of the act by which we affirm the inde- 
pendence of the object. We do not admit that it is addressed to us, 
or that we are for it; whereas a work of art, to the extent to which 
it is not a simple thing (a canvas, etc.), is essentially addressed 
to us. It reveals itself to us; it takes us into account; we are for 
it. Here we have an interesting transition to the problem of 


finality. 


August 23rd, 1918 

In the judgment involving ‘/’ the immediacy (absence of the 
subject, non-relation to a subject, unrelatedness to a subject) 
functions as subject. This needs to be made more precise. / am 
tired. There is a pure and simple feeling, that is to say an absolute, 
or something which imitates an absolute, something not related 
to something else or mediatised. In the judgment of the ‘/’ it is 
precisely the non-relation which functions as the him or it; 
_ on this non-relation the feeling, now become a predicate, depends. 
So the dialogue proceeds as follows. “Someone is tired. Who is? 
Iam.’ This would have no meaning if the ‘7’ were not directed to 
another interlocutor for whom the ‘/’ is someone in particular, a 
given person. And I only become a given person for myself 
through the mediating idea of the other for whom I am a given 
person. In principle and strictly speaking I am absolutely not a 
given person for myself, I am even the negation of a given person. 
Hence we clearly see the analogy—it is at least external—that 


1Note of 1925. As will be seen further on, the term communication is absolutely unsuitable. 
Note of 1925. More exactly in any order in which a relation with the Ae or it subsists, 
a relation implying the interposition of a thou. 


F 145 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


exists between J and a thought in general (the Denken tiberhaupt 
of the Kantians) which is certainly not a given (thought) and to 
which all judgment is referred. 

Yet this / seems always to be posited as being in confron- 
tation with a thou, for whom in turn I myself am a thou. And it is 
in function of this dialogue and in relation to it that a Ae or zt can 
be defined, that is, an independent world or at least a world that 
is—doubtless by a fiction—treated as independent. Here lies 
the profound importance of Royce’s triadism and [| think it 
has never been made sufficiently explicit. In more intelligible 
language, all independent reality can and must be treated as a 
third party. And if a third party supposes a dialogue it is never- 
theless true to say that all dialogue is given to itself as a third 
purty. 

I glimpse a sort of slow transition from pure dialectics to 
love, in the measure in which the thou becomes thou more and 
more profoundly. For it begins so to speak by being essentially 
a him with the form of a thou. I meet a stranger in the train. We 
speak of the heat, of the war news, etc., but even when I address 
him, he does not cease to be ‘somebody’, ‘that person’, in my 
eyes. He is ‘somebody’ whose biography I get to know little by 
little. And inasmuch as he, for me, is ‘somebody’, I appear to 
myself as ‘somebody else’. (This helps us to a better under- 
standing of the meaning of the English term ‘self-conscious- 
ness’.)' Somebody else communicates himself to me by signs 
which coincide with signs of mine, and that is all. But it may well 
happen that I become more and more conscious that I am having 
a dialogue with myself (which does not in any way mean that 
the other person and I myself appear to me to be identical); that 
is he participates more and more in the absolute which is un- 
relatedness and we cease more and more to be ‘somebody’ and 
‘somebody else’. We become simply ‘us’.? In the old philosophical 
language one would have said he becomes less and less an object 
for me—but that way of expressing it seems to me ambiguous 


1 Note of 1925. Generally speaking the more my interlocutor is exterior to me the more 
I am by the same token exterior to myself; the more I am conscious not of what I am, but 
of my qualities and my faults, my ‘particular characteristics.’ 

2 Note of 1925. This is bound up with the experience of the inexhaustible wealth of a 
perpetual ‘again’ which is the very antithesis of boredom. This remark has great import- 
ance for our notion of duration. 


146 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


and not very intelligible. For me, the being I love is a third person 
in the least possible degree. Moreover, that being discovers me to 
myself, since the efficacy of his or her presence is such that I _ 
am less and less Aim for myself—my interior defences fall at the 
same time as the barriers that separate me from somebody else. 
The being I love comes more and more into the circle in relation 
to which and outside which there are third parties, third parties 
who are ‘the others.’ But knowledge of the third party does not 
suppress the third party as third party. And inversely: there are 
categories, if I can so express it, that do not overlap. Perhaps we 
ought to make a distinction between knowledge and familiarity, 
by adopting the latter word in its original meaning, which is not 
the one we have become used to. Moreover, it is not certain that 
another distinction ought not to be made—between familiarity 
and love.! 


December 8th, 1918 


Given the relation of thought to thing which seems to be involved 
in the act of predication it is worth observing: 

1. That the thing can never be regarded as a sum of pre- 
dicates, for the plus sign only relates to the form of accumulation 
(the juxtaposition of interests), which is purely mental. 

2. That the predicate only symbolises and determines 
an answer to a determined question, so that when we say 
A is p we merely mean that in function of the interest, A 
answers p. 

3. That to ask oneself what A is, apart from the predicates 
a, b, c, d, is either to ask oneself what its other predicates are 
(which possibly has some meaning, whatever the predicates 
enumerated, for it may well be that an exhaustive enumeration is 
unthinkable) or else to ask oneself what A answers to a question 
which is not one of the thinkable questions, that is, to an absence 
of question. But we know that the answer is not precisely zero. 
It is: this. A is a predicate (or a grouping of predicates) determined 


1T tend to believe that I can only speak of my soul in the exact and exclusive measure 
in which the relation of love—whose dialectic is at one and the same time intellectual 
emergence and in some degree negation—is established between me and myself. 
But words are deceptive. Here we are not dealing with terms and with a relation 
between them. There is'really an undecomposable whole, namely self-intimacy or interior 


life. 
147 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


and affected by the index zis. And it is only this index that confers 
on A its apparent substantiality.+ 

Thus we have no right to say that A can be reduced to a 
grouping of answers; the questions themselves are only possible 
on the basis of this, of immediate presentation. 


December ioth, 1918 


Evidently the thing is that which is not conserved; it is inasmuch 
as we are things, not inasmuch as we are bodies, that we are 
mortal. 

This obscure phrase refers to a group of undated reflections 
that I reproduce here in spite of their character being perhaps 
contradictory in part. 

_ Only that which can be conceived of as dispersed or lost 
can be thought of as conserved. 

Conservation implies the action of a force which is opposed 
to dispersion, that is to say a concrete unity that is thought as 
external or internal to the whole; which whole is thus itself a 
concrete unity in another sense or at least is treated as such. 

The idea of conservation implies the ideas of protection and 
of value; the whole is of value as a whole, either for itself or else 
for the agent that conserves it (for the moment I am not going 
deeper into this distinction). 

There is a continuity between the act by which I think the 
whole as whole (not only as aggregate); that by which I assign it 
a value, a quality; and that by which I conserve it. 

Example: the act of conserving a letter instead of throwing it 
away or tearing it up. 

Invariably the emphasis is put on. the identity of place, or 
else, if change of place occurs, we neglect it. 

Superficially there seems to be a profound difference between 
the conservation of a thing by someone and the conservation of 
self by self; and the first case seems simpler than the second. But 
deeper reflection shows that this is not so. 

I decide to preserve a letter. What does that mean? First 
I posit that the letter is a concrete unity with a value (what kind 
of value does not matter here); then that this act negates the 


1 Distinguish here between 4 and an A. Every judgment bearing on an A is at bottom 
hypothetical; the judgment on. 4 is categorical. 


148 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


forces of dispersion (there is no need to specify further) which are 
exercised by the very fact that the letter is an aggregate and is 
not necessarily bound down to a given place (and thus it can be 
torn up, even by carelessness, or mislaid). In fact I can only 
preserve the letter because at once I think of it as physical object 
and because I take into account the way it is given to me and the 
possible agents of dispersion. Thus at the root of the preservation 
of the letter there is the idea of the letter. The latter is not external 
to the former. They form an autonomous whole. The preser- 
vation is bound up with the functioning of this whole. The 
living centre of it is the value or active quality of the letter. 
I can never speak of preservation save when by imagination I 
construct a whole of this type (it is the quality by which an 
aggregate is negated in some measure as such and in no other 
sense). From this we can derive a whole series of important con- 
sequences. To begin with the idea of preservation can only 
be applied to the universe considered as a whole on condition 
that it is not regarded as a sum, as a total of juxtaposed ele- 
ments. 


APPLICATION TO MEMORY 


Do recollections conserve themselves, it may be asked, or is there 
an activity that tends to conserve them? But this distinction has 
no meaning. Recollections are not external to psychical activity. 
The idea of preservation implies place in the measure in which 
only that which is in aggregate in @ certain relation can be con- 
served. Recollections can only be preserved in so far as they are 
elements—that is to say are susceptible of being preserved. But 
what does this mean? Is there really a sense in which we can treat 
recollection as an element or as an aggregate susceptible of being 
dissipated? We seem bound to recognise that in reality the spatial 
ideas of loss and of dissipation fundamentally imply something 
spiritual. I say that a whole is dispersed. This means that it ceases 
to be a datum given as a whole to the psychological activity to 
which I make reference. . . . To lose is essentially to forget. 
Mnemonic experience is really the root of the rudimentary ex- 
periences to which people claim to reduce it. 

It may be pointed out that there is a possibility of absolute 


149 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


loss and total disappearance. But it is plain that this disappearance 
only is for those who survive and remember, who oppose their 
now to a then that they imagine or recall—but who at a given 
moment lost sight of and let escape from the grip of their atten- 
tion precisely that which they are now endeavouring in vain to 
recall. . . . Yet can we not conceive of a vigilant and continuous 
attention being nevertheless impotent to retain what is dispersed? 
For instance, a mother who cannot save her child who is dan- 
gerously ill. Is the power of effective protection the measure of 
love? We can scarcely think this in view of the radical hetero- 
geneity that seems to exist between the spiritual power that saves 
and the forces of dispersal it confronts—a heterogeneity that 
seems bound up with the very nature of the finite. Rightly or 
wrongly spiritual power seems to us to be capable of triumphing 
only over spiritual inattention and dispersal. ‘The common belief 
is that itis only in this indirect way that spiritual power can triumph 
over material dissolution and anarchic material forces. If spiritual 
power, and the will for salvation, imposed itself directly on 
the physical forces of dissolution so as to subjugate them, 
we would have—and in the technical sense—the miraculous 
re-creation.+ 


THe PROBLEM OF THE CONSERVATION OF THE PAST 


There is a sense in which what we call an event is eternal truth 
(a totality of judgments that meet); and in this sense it would be 
absurd to speak of conservation. There is only conservation of 
that which has duration—of that on which time gnaws. The past, 
it seems, can only be conserved in the measure in which it is 
transformed by outliving itself (just as in melody the first notes 
are transformed by those which follow and are given a value 
they could not have had by themselves). The motionless memory 
of Bergson is a pure abstraction, it cannot have duration, it 
cannot conserve itself. It may be contended that the letter that is 
conserved does not have duration. But it has duration in and 
through the thought that conserves it, that watches over it. It 


* Note of 1925. But deep down within us is there not something that protests against 
the over-strict dissociation of the two types of dispersal, a forefeeling or presentiment of 
fresh truth that is not yet formulatable? 


150 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


has duration inasmuch as it is incorporated with a living person, 
and the same is true of the event which lasts in so far as it is 
recalled and coloured by the moving present which evokes it 
and arrays it before itself. We might be tempted to add that the 
letter has duration materially in that it wears out—the writing 
becomes effaced, etc. But all this is only the temporal expression 
of the letter considered as thing, as aggregate, of the letter 
inasmuch as it is not conserved. 

But there are many difficulties. The principle of conservation 

itself seems subject to duration. Again, duration implies self- 
conservation, etc. ... Are we not obliged to convert God into 
an eternal truth by the fact that we view him as the first principle 
of all conservation? Whereas an eternal truth is powerless to 
conserve or—if you will—to save. 
Is the eternal the lowest limit of all conservation? that on 
which time does not gnaw? In this sense only an element would 
be eternal; as indeterminate and non-qualified (for all quality 
has reference to a totality of other qualities and in consequence 
is involved in duration). Understood in this sense, the eternal 
is clearly the infra-temporal, eternity is only a negative value. 
But can we conceive an upper limit of conservation? That is the 
real problem of eternity. It is infinitely obscure. For if we con- 
ceive as positively eternal the act which apprehends a duration 
as a whole, as present—it looks as if that act itself must either 
be an instant, which though perhaps privileged is involved in a 
duration that stretches beyond it, or else it must be a simple 
truth, that is to say, something abstract. 

In any event it seems to me established that the eternal cannot 
be defined without reference to value (under pain of being reduced 
to what I have called the infra-temporal). 

I have been reflecting once again on the mysterious relation 
between conservation and creation. There can only be conser- 
vation in the realm of that which is created which is also the realm 
of that which has value (conservation implies the active struggle 
against dissolution). 

We tend to look on what happens to us as scenes in a film 
that are enacted before us but come from nowhere and lead 
nowhere. The image is unintelligible. Moreover, it is impossible 
to conceive the relation between something which happens and 


151 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


the ego to which this or chat happens. It seems to me that this 
gulf has passed almost unnoticed. 


December 11th, 1918 


On the possibility of prediction (regarding the extraordinary 
case of T.). 

Under what conditions is prediction possible? Prophesying 
means seeing; hence what is going to happen to us must already e 
—but in what sense? The future cannot be present in the sense in 
which a veiled object which will shortly be uncovered before me 
is present. The question where has no meaning here (e.g. where is 
the future?). What will be already zs, but for somebody else. 
Does this somebody, in his turn, foresee? Perhaps, but in that 
case we are making no headway; the same question now arises 
for this other. Hence this series of consciousnesses that can divine, 
which is perhaps very long, has for term a consciousness that is 
master of the future, that is at one and the same time the present 
and what is yet to come. This can be made clearer with the help 
of examples. I start telling a story, but not only do I foresee the 
situation towards which my story is leading, I know where I want 
to end up; I know what the end will be because I will it to be 
thus. I cast forward. All prediction seems to me to imply a— . 
perhaps entirely indirect—participation in the life of a con- 
sciousness that forecasts. This consciousness does not foresee, 
it creates in advance. But this applies in innumerable ways. F or 
example, I may well see what is not to be. It is conceivable that 
the consciousness that is master of the future is nevertheless not 
all-powerful and hence is incapable of realising what it‘ forecasts’. 
Hence we are obliged to recognise that effective vision may have 
taken place even though the prophecy has not been confirmed by 
the facts. Or, again, inasmuch as this consciousness improvises 
it may, for its own ends, be led to make use of an empirical 
material that is provided for it from outside. It may be that we 
are dealing with something unforeseeable from the standpoint 
of the beings who participate at its projection, in the measure 
in which there is something for itselfand this consciousness does 
not know how to tackle it. Or it may well be that what is impos- 
sible for it, seen from another standpoint, in the centre of another 
system of references, is an object of potential prediction. 


152 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Of course what I fail to grasp clearly is the relation of the 
consciousness or supra-consciousness in question to my con- 
sciousness or yours. It appears to be alike richer and more effica- 
cious; in a word, to be endowed with a superior power of concen- 
tration. But is it strictly speaking an ‘other’? It would be tempting 
to say that we are organic in relation to it. But is that intelligible? 


December 12th, 1918 


This morning I discovered a vital link for my argument. The 
questions I am able to answer are exclusively questions brought 
to bear on information that I am capable of providing (even 
about myself), For example: “What is the capital of Afghanistan?’ 
‘Do you like French beans?’ Whereas the more it becomes a 
matter of what I am considered as a whole (and not of what I 
have) the more the answers and even the questions lose their 
meaning: for instance ‘Are you virtuous?’ or even ‘Are you 
courageous? } 

That is why at bottom it is meaningless to ask: ‘Do you 
believe in God?’ when belief in God is understood not as an 
opinion on the existence of a person but as ‘mode of being.’ 
The same possibly applies regarding belief in immortality. Hence 
it follows: 

1. That the belief of somebody else cannot be known by me 
(it cannot be the object of a questionnaire). 

2. Acardinal point. In the measure in which every dialogue 
with myself (or reflection) is the interiorised reproduction of a 
dialogue with someone else, my belief can no more become an 
object for me than can my being. I cannot really question myself 
about my belief. (This is the deepest meaning of Le Palais de 
Sable—I feel I have never grasped it so clearly.) Hence God can 
never be a third in relation to the ego-subject ego-object dyad, 
and this gives their full meaning to my notes of July 23, 1918. 

Clarifications. The belief of someone else—I must be clearer 
about what this means—can only be an object of belief for me, 
but from the moment that I believe im the belief I believe with 
the someone else. The unbeliever does not believe in the belief 


1 This links up with the central problem of Un Homme de Dieu. se 
2 Note of 1924. In the measure in which belief in God is real it is a ‘manner of being 
and an ontological modification. 


F* 153 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of others. By that I do not mean that he judges it to be insincere 
(though this is often the case) but that he interprets the belief 
as an existential judgment that is mistaken. When I am asked: 
‘Do you believe in God?’ it is as though I were asked: ‘Do you 
think Mars is inhabited?’ or ‘Are you impressionable?’ In either 
case we have missed the essential point about belief: namely, that 
it is a personal way of qualifying the world metaphysically, that 
is to say, it is experience.1 It is certain, moreover, that more often 
than not the attitude of the sceptic consists in looking on belief 
as a subjective disposition to which a reality may correspond. 
But this dualism is quite untenable. For to think God is to think 
him as bound up with the affirmation regarding him (and doubt- 
less as playing a part in it); to think God as real is to affirm that 
it is important for God that I should believe in him, whereas 
thinking this table means thinking it as entirely indifferent to the 
fact that I think it. A God for whom my belief were of no interest 
would not be God but a mere entity of metaphysics. ‘The sceptic 
may say: ‘I agree. Either you believe in God, but your belief 
only qualifies yourself, or e/se your belief has a metaphysical 
value, and in that case it does really matter to God.’ I want to 
find out exactly what the first alternative means. 

It consists in opposing to the statement: ‘I believe in God’ 
—which, it is considered, should properly be changed into a 
question—this answer: *Yes, but God is not.’ That is to say it 
consists in admitting that reality (?) speaking through an informed 
interpreter, gives a negative answer to the question. A person 
in the know tells you that the fe or it is not divine. But as this 
can be interiorised by the believer himself it is clear that we reach 
a point at which we place ourselves absolutely outside the con- 
ditions just defined—since we have specified that God cannot 
function as a he or it or a third party in relation to a dialogue.” 


1 Note of 1925. This way of expressing myself no longer seems to me to be either 
very clear or very adequate. For we are not concerned with a qualification that is 
itself contingent in relation to the object with which the subject would collate it, but 
with a relation that is sui generis between the real individual who is neither impersonal 
form nor pure empirical content, and the reality to which he is attached, and grasps 
himself as being attached, when he makes an invocation. 

* It is essential to note that all this links up with what I said elsewhere about the un- 
verifiable. All that is of the order of the he or it is verifiable; that which only allows for 
a dyadic relation is unverifiable—that is, it transcends all verification. (It must be added 
that verification supposes the possibility of indefinite numbers of substitutions, which 
are not conceivable when I am in presence of a rhou. This is an essential point.) 


154 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Here we seem to be saying (to ourselves or to someone else—it 
amounts to the same thing): “You affirm that there is a third 
party who is God, but that third party is not God; nothing about 
him is divine.’ Now this answer to a question which was not asked 
is meaningless (since we precisely excluded the possibility of a 
triadic relation between the subject, himself and God). Hence 
our first alternative has no meaning, or rather it is only a negative 
confirmation of what we already posited. 

Perhaps these reflections throw some light on the appalling 
problem of the relation between the subject and its predicates. 
For can we not say that in the measure in which the subject really 
is (in the sense in which I am) no more than I myself does this 
subject permit of being determined by means of questions and 
answers? T’o the question: “What am I?’ I do not know what to 
answer, whereas I have no difficulty in answering the question: 
“Am I blond?’ or ‘Am I greedy?”, etc. From the moment I think a 
thing as subject (a way of considering it which may, I think, be 
illegitimate in certain cases) I think it as susceptible of answering 
not a global question but detailed questions.! This is very clear 
regarding a person and perhaps even as regards God. But it may 
be only through confusion and by analogy that I treat a thing as 
having characteristics and as being undefinable considered apart 
from the characteristics it possesses. Perhaps the idea of thing 
(subject) needs to be eliminated entirely—that is what I tend to 
believe. It may be contested that this ‘substantialism’ is every bit 
as justifiable if applied to me myself. But when I think myself as 
myself (and all decision and all action presupposes that I do) 
I treat myself as a whole; and the same applies when I love or I 
am loved, etc. Thus we get to an important proposition: in the 
measure in which a reality is treated as a whole it transcends the 
course of thought that proceeds by questions and answers; 
between consciousness and itself it can only establish a dual 
relation (or more precisely what appears to reflection as such a 
relation; for when we are only two we are in some way one only— 
the pseudo-dualism of the epistemologists is in reality a trialism). 
The dual relation is what in my previous enquiries I have called 


1 That is why substance is unknowable, i.e. surpasses dialectics. And this can easily be 
understood. How could it answer us save by being given in detail? If it is given all to- 
gether, the moment of the Ae or it and that of the thou are identified; we have a dyad 
(i.e. we are outside knowledge with its bearing on a third reality). 


Tj) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


participation. In this way complete unity is achieved between my 
present reflections and my former ones. We now begin to see how 
believing in God means having dual relations with the real. But 
obviously this excessively abstract formula needs to be elucidated 
and specified. 

God is reality in that reality absolutely cannot be treated 
as a he or it. Was this not what I meant when I maintained that 
no judgments on God are possible? But this needs further exam- 
ination. Are there no judgments in the second person? When, 
for instance, I say to someone: “You are good.’ 

It must be noticed, I think, that all judgments in the second 
person aim at being heard; they have a finality that does not 
exist in judgments in the third person. It may be objected that 
the latter are intended to give information. But this does not 
apply to judgments in the second person, or at least only second- 
arily. Every thou judgment expresses a relation of myself to the 
interlocutor and the wish that this relation should be known by 
him. (“You are good’ is equivalent to: ‘Know that I find you 
good.’) In short, personal relations could only be between the 
believer and God, and if one placed oneself outside belief one 
would be prohibiting oneself from thinking God. 

This whole theory is a reflection of belief, but one that 
implies the non-conversion of belief into a relation of subject to 
object. To be examined further. 


December 14th, 1918 


Existence and predication. Only that which can be an object 
of predication, which can be a datum, exists (to make a judgment 
of existence one must provide data by predicates). Hence the very 
clear relation between the fact that there is no meaning in saying 
that God exists, and the impossibility of attributing characteris- 
tics to him, of converting him into a he or it. 

But does not this way of thinking God amount to making him 
entirely dependent on me, since only the object is grasped as 
independent of the act by which I conceive it? Hence a patently 
absurd problem that it is hard to avoid stating: What is God 
inasmuch as I do not think of him?—But (apart from the fact that 
the words ‘think of God’ conceal a fundamental ambiguity) it is 
clear that when we ask this question we are once more converting 


156 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


God into a third party. Someone was with me. That person leaves 
me. I ask myself what happened to him. The question has the 
same sense as if it were about a thing; it is only possible because 
the person can in some measure be treated as a thing. But in so 
far as there is a spiritual relation between that person and me the 
question changes its aspect. To be defined more exactly. 

I can now see more clearly the meaning of the judgment in the 
second person. When it informs it implies that in thee there is a he 
or it for thyself. If my judgment: ‘You are (thou art) or you are 
not (thou art not) this or that; you have or you have not that 
particular quality’ is aimed at informing you, this is because I 
admit that there is in you something that zs not for you, regarding 
which you have (at least virtually) questioned me. Whereas if 
this judgment is not aimed at informing you about yourself, 
it only has bearing on me (it informs you about me); it is then in 
me that there is him or it for thee. (“You are good: I admire you, 
etc.’) How do these reflections apply to God? The first form is 
plainly inapplicable here. Because it is, fundamentally, a form of he 
or it; I speak to you of someone else who is only verbally con- 
fused with me. Now, for God, can there be any Aim or it in me? 
The question looks as though it needs modifying if it is to have 
an intelligible meaning. The second form does not seem to me 
any more acceptable; for to say that in relation to God there is 
any him or it in me is to think of God as a third party; it is to 
discuss God with oneself. Possibly there we have the real meaning 
of divine omniscience. In this instance as in others the experience 
of love puts us on the right road. In me there would be no he 
or it for thee if thou and J loved one another absolutely; and this 
does not mean that you (thou) would have the intuition of myself, 


but that I would be appropriated by you (thee). 


December 18th, 1918 


What is preoccupying me this morning is how to understand how 
God can surpass me infinitely without becoming a he or iz for me. 
To elucidate the meaning of this properly we must take up the 
fundamental notions once more. In principle and according to 
current notions the being to whom I address myself is someone 
of whom I can speak (and consequently on whom I can reflect). 
This possibility implies a double limitation of both him and me; 


1}7 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


it supposes that I can treat him as someone who is not there, 
that I can set him aside; and also, as far as J am concerned, that 
the bond between us is not absolute (I cannot really discuss 
the being I love absolutely with a third party). Supposing it be 
objected that this is merely a contingent sentiment? ‘hat ob- 
jection would be very uninstructive. In reality the being I love 
has not got qualities for me; I grasp him as a whole, that is 
why he is refractory to predication. Similarly with a work of 
art: the more I love it the less I can qualify it, the less any quali- 
fication appears adequate for what I experience. But does love 
involve the affirmation of a closed, exhaustible content? On the 
contrary—it bears on the infinite. Nothing is more false than to 
identify the zhou with a bounded and circumscribed content. Par- 
ticipation in divine life can only be grasped as participation in an 
infinite. But the infinite cannot be thought apart from the partici- 
pation; that is what I laboured to express in 1914. Doubtless this 
participation cannot be separated up into detail, but that does not 
mean that all is given me at once—to say that would be meaning- 
less. When I talk with someone for whom I experience nothing 
resembling love, he appears to me as capable of furnishing me 
with a certain set of answers to questions bearing on himself (what 
is his name, when and where was he born, etc.). He himself, if you 
like, is a filled-up questionnaire. The more I love a being and 
the more I participate in his life the less adequate this way of 
thinking is shewn to be. The beloved is beyond all these questions; 
they seem insignificant and absolutely external. 

To say that the being I love was born on a certain date at 
such and such a place, etc. is meaningless. Such determinations in 
no way enhance the content on which my love is brought to bear. 
From this we can doubtless conclude that to love someone truly 
is to love him in God. But there is great need of precision here. 

Another difficulty. Are we not obliged to think something 
which is ‘in the third person’ in relation to God and the believer 
(that functions as the Aim or it for them)—and that without this 
something all dialogue would be impossible? In other words do 
we not end up with a new triad? Plainly this is a major issue. 
The world would be a third in the unceasing dialogue I pursue 
with God; but then is it not zt for both? 

Perhaps this may help. The lover finds in things the where- 


158 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


withal to render homage to the beloved. The lover offers the 
world as well as himself to his mistress: ‘All this is yours.’ It 
remains for us to understand how the believer looks on ‘all this’ as 
at the same time created by God. At this moment I cannot see; yet I 
know I have understood it. In any case the believer seems to con- 
fer a kind of consecration on God. Metaphorically, and departing 
a long way from the rigorous language I have been using, it could 
be said that God expects each believer to confer his (God’s) divi- 
nity on him. This allows us to set aside the insoluble problems of 
theodicy. It seems to me that on this point the unbeliever could 
be brought to understand that he cannot speak of God yet. ... 
Yesterday I found the following formula: when we speak of God 
we should realise that it is not of God that we are speaking. We 
must be careful about this when we treat God as creator. I think 
that our attitude then is only a degeneration of the “Yours, O my 
God,’ that is wrung from the religious heart at the sight of a 
moving spectacle. For this appeal to God has no meaning and 
value unless it is accompanied by emotion. Otherwise it is only a 
mechanical formula or the initial stage of idolatry. 

And this I think is the meaning of the relation that I referred to 
earlier. Doubtless I give to God, but what I give already belongs 
to him. The consecration is at the same time a sort of restitution. 
All this must be examined more thoroughly. I belong to God, 
but I ought to give myself to him, to turn myself towards him. 
Here there is a mystery, but it is involved in the very relation 
that unites me to God. 

Consequences regarding prayer. 

All prayer is addressed to a free being (to a being who has 
mastery over a certain order). Prayer is posited as susceptible 
of being understood and of influencing the being to whom it is 
addressed. Notice that when it is addressed to a finite being it 
may happen that it is not understood, or is not taken into con- 
sideration. Does this apply to God? The finite being is able to avoid 
taking it into consideration because the person who addresses it to 
him is for him a third person with whom he in no way identifies 
himself. But it may be that I am a third person for God. Hence, 
supposing that what I have prayed for is not fulfilled I can- 
not say that my prayer has not been-heard (or if I do say so, 
it will be because I have ceased to be aware that it is to God 


159 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


that I address it, because I have fallen into idolatry). By a formula 
all too human, my resentment will be expressed in terms of he. 
Supposing it be said that in all things I should bow to the divine 
behests and hence that prayer is useless? That is another idolatry, 
the idolatry of necessity. The narrow isthmus of religious thought 
lies between these two idolatries. Here I find i concreto what I 
said earlier. My prayer cannot be thought as not interesting God, 
not attaining God; to that extent my prayer is certainly efficacious. 
Supposing it be objected that in spite of this the divine decrees 
must be considered as being made from all eternity? But I am 
convinced that if from all eternity means ‘a time incapable of 
measurement’ we are deep in heresy (and perhaps involved in 
extreme absurdity). But this must be examined further. To pray 
is actively to refuse to think God as order, it is to think him as 


really God, as pure Zhou. 


January 18th, 1919 


I can now clearly understand the meaning of L’/conoclaste: it is 
that mystery has its own peculiar value. And this links up with a 
whole order of ideas that seem to me essential. The fact that it is 
known does not change the nature of a thing, but it transforms 
its value; it gives it a renewed significance and hence a superior 
efficacity. The same may apply on another plane to mystery. ... 
There are certain higher relations which are only defined and 
elucidated by communion in mystery. There is nothing of banal 
agnosticism in this—on the contrary, that view maintains that 
the fact of being known or not known in no way alters the object. 
Here precisely lies the difference between what is mysterious and 
what is unknown. Only that which has interest in not being 
revealed is mysterious. Transition from the idea of mystery to 
the idea of revelation. 


January 21st, 1919 


To name a being is to effect a sort of subtle transposition of the 
thou into a he. To name is to recall, to remember that the being 
of whom we are speaking can become the object of invocation 
(I remember how much M. was grieved when I spoke of him in his 
presence and said fe). 

To return to the idea of mystery. There is only mystery in 


160 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the order of he who knows. ... What is unknown and does not 
know is merely ignored. What knows and does not wish to be 
known, and proceeds in such a way as not to be known, is myster- 
ious (there is also the category of that which is powerless to make 
itself known—this, too, belongs to the order of the ignored). 
The idea of mystery thus implies the idea of power and it is bound 
up with the very idea of God. To think God is to think him as 
being in this way mysterious. Supposing it be objected that in 
so thinking him I infringe his defences? But we must grasp that 
what is not known as mysterious does not participate in mystery 
(to realise this we only need to think of what happens in a 
mystery novel). But here we need to ask ourselves if I do not 
myself become in some degree mysterious for the being who 
insists on remaining mysterious for me. And furthermore, up to 
what point the mysterious is the object of questions and answers? 
This is a cardinal point. 

Our world is certainly not a world from which the mysterious 
is excluded, a world in which all that has the power of com- 
municating itself communicates itself directly and spontaneously. 
Hence there is an intimate relationship between the idea of 
mystery and the idea of value. Only that which is capable of 
interesting me and presenting a value for me is mysterious. For 
why should the other refrain from communication to me what is in 
no way my concern? There must be a positive reason for this 
failure to communicate—not merely the absence of a reason for 
communicating. This is very important. Hence there must be an 
interest common to both of us. But it seems to me very clear that 
when I think myself as existing for the other the other becomes 
a thou for me. Hence mystery is only possible in the order of the 
thou.’ The agnostics have always overlooked this. . . . 


January 22nd, 1919 
By its very essence the objective order excludes all mystery. The 
object can only be thought as indifferent to the act by which I 
think it. There lies the deepest teaching in realism. I can only 
think the object as object in realist terms—and as soon as I think 
a subject as object exactly the same applies. 

(Perhaps it would be better to say that realism is contained 
1 T am no longer (1925) absolutely sure of the validity of this piece of reasoning. 

161 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


in the definition and the very idea of the object—this point is not 
only admitted by idealists, it is proclaimed.) 


February 11th, 1919 


It is evident that the signpost that answers a question does not 
know that I ask it—and the person who has placed it there does 
not know either. The signpost is addressed to—and answers— 
a questioner in general. But this only shows how far we have 
gone in abstraction. The questions ‘Where does this road lead 
to?’ ‘Is it prohibited to walk on the grass?’, etc. are addressed 
to ‘Anybody’. 

We cannot insist too much on the bond between what I 
have called dialectical thought and the fact of thinking by subject 
and predicates (in which dialectics are incorporated). ‘The subject 
as subject is only a filled out questionnaire. 

About What is the Real Julius Caesar? (Bradley: Essays on 
Truth and Reality.) 

It seems to me that my attitude is quite different from 
Bradley’s. For me being is only immanent for thought that loves, 
not for the judgment bearing on being. P. said to me: “Supposing 
I am judged to be a mere bookworm, I who, nevertheless . . . ” 
In that case clearly the identity of the subject of the judgment 
and of the reality on which the judgment bears is only nominal. 
To judge is to classify. To judge an individual exactly is to classify 
correctly. What do we mean by that? That there should be a 
correspondence between the judge’s mode of classifying and the 
mode of his interlocutors (who are supposed to be informed), 
and that on the other hand the subsequent acts of the individual - 
ought to be such as not to make necessary a continual revision of 
the initial classification. But it seems to me evident that judgment 
as such has no ontological value. I cannot see any meaning in 
saying that the object of classification is (or is not) present. 
(I would say that all judgment plays on the edge of the real.) 
This links up with my trialism. Judgment bears essentially on a 
he or it, on something which is thought beyond all doubt capable 
of being put into a category. 


February 22nd, 1919 
Had an extremely interesting conversation with P. 
162 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


He wonders whether it is conceivable—even if we admit the 
spiritist’ hypothesis—that a ‘spirit’ can be ‘identified’. Let us 
go so far as to admit that a revelation has been made involving 
something that only the spirit could have known (the contents 
of a chest the spirit sealed up when alive). May it not well be 
that I have entered into sympathetic communication with his 
state of mind of that time, which, in a deep sense, surely remains 
actual? The fact that no contemporary knows anything would 
not be a valid negative proof. 

Once again we have contrasted communion (I am looking 
for an equivalent of Mitsein) and transmission. As I pointed out, 
even pure transmission (by letter, telegram, etc.) in last analysis 
implies an affectionate solicitude or at least a will to protect the 
content which is treated as value. 

In short, only love—by the recognition of a spiritual con- 
tinuity—could identify; we would have to be in an order in which 
we said ‘It is thou’ and not ‘It is he.’ We have reflected on the 
fact that the dead man present in the evocation does not answer; 
I have pointed out that all that can truly be said is that he does 
not inform, and we have no grounds for stating that he does not 
enrich by his real presence (impossibility of etiology in the 
spiritual order).1 

To return to the instance of the chest. We set out from the 
idea (or pseudo-idea) that there is information to be ‘extracted’ 
‘somewhere’—and we ask where? But when we say information 
we mean transmission by symbols; this applies whether I am con- 
sulting my guide or another traveller. I treat the traveller’s 
memory (or brain) as the equivalent of a railway guide or notice 
board. But though in practice his memory is able to fulfil that 
office for me, it is not in fact a system of symbols. Hence when we 
speak of ‘extracting from a consciousness’ what do we mean? 
If it were a matter of digging out a piece of information there 
would be need for an operation that is strictly analogous to the 
operation of reading (deciphering) or listening or interpreting 
—and that is meaningless. So there must be communication with 
memory inasmuch as it is memory (that is to say inasmuch as it is 
act or vision and not a system of signs). The clairvoyant does not 


1 We even ought to ask whether on a certain plane the term cause still retains any 
meaning. 


163 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


read in me he remembers me in my stead. He participates in my 
memory, he informs himself only as much as I inform myself 
when I recollect my past. 

I am fully aware that this is very difficult to take in, and that it 
is almost immediately travestied by the imagination. Our ten- 
dency is to present things in terms of the following points: 

1. That to recall is to make an inventory or to take up a 
leaf from a diary. : 

2. That A, the subject, possesses (?) a collection or aggregate 
—C—of recollections; B, another subject, possesses another 
ageregate—Ci—of recollections. It goes without saying that B 
is able to bring an element—E—from Ci into C if he converts it 
into an object for A by communicating it (either orally or in 
writing or in any other way). 

3. Hence that it is impossible for A to find in his collection 
or aggregate an element that has not been put there. 

But I repeat we must not identify memory with a collection 
or aggregate. To recall really means to re-live (in accord with 
certain modalities) it does not mean to re-read a note. Hence we 
can grasp why the abstract can only be transmitted or communi- 
cated—precisely because it is very feebly lived. In place of the 
formula I have emphasised above perhaps it would be better to 
substitute another even though it seems still more paradoxical: 
namely that My past becomes that of the clairvoyant. (It may be 
said that in any case there could be no question that a// my past 
should do so. But fragmentation in itself is meaningless; let us 
say that the clairvoyant’s attention is concentrated on a privileged 
moment of my past that has become his.) What is my past? What 
relation is there between my past and myself? I notice that I am 
the less my past the more I treat my past as a collection of events 
registered or enumerated in time, with my body serving as link. 
Inversely it becomes more difficult to set up an inventory of 
what I am when the word being is applied in a deeper way (I am 
thinking at this moment of my ideas as I adhere to them, of my 
feelings and beliefs). Thus if by my past we understand the past 
that I am as contrasted with the past that I have, we must admit 
that the former past, far from being thought under the form of a 
collection can only be thought as object of faith or of love; (and 
my relation with this past remains inevitably precarious and 


164 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


mysterious; it is these elements of myself that are incapable of 
being forever disposed of that Proust has emphasised so marvel- 
lously, though there is need to distinguish between what they 
are in themselves and the intermittent and lightning appercep- 
tions by which they seem to be given to us at certain privileged 
moments). 

I must admit that what I have just said still far from satisfies 
- me. It still seems as if A is external to the datum of B’s past, 
with the result that we cannot understand how communion can 
be established. But obviously this is meaningless. B’s past cannot 
be a datum. Only that from which we can borrow is given as 
datum, and even here we have two complementary notions; only 
that which can pass into the state of being information (or which 
can be treated as potential information) is datum (a railway guide 
for instance). In this sense to the given I oppose the lived, the 
lived which can as lived only be trans-lived—translived seems an 
excellent word in contrast to transmitted. Inasmuch as my memory 
can be likened to a diary we can say that my past is given as 
datum; but from this point of view no communication with it is 
possible. Thus the more my past is really and intimately mine 
(the more it is at one with my being) the less it is a datum given. 
Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that it lives on. But 
how then can we talk of exteriority? The other person is other 
for me inasmuch as his collection does not coincide with mine; 
and hence the one is able to enrich the other. The other person 
is less other when our collections are less different, and in that 
the categories of aggregate or questionnaire are less applicable 
to him—in other words the more he is a thou for me. The more 
I treat him as a thou, the more he ceases to be a collection or 
aggregate for me or, more exactly, the more he ceases to be a 
person who has a collection—and the less sense there is in 
saying that he is exterior to me, the less his past is datum for me, 
the less the expression ‘his past’ has meaning. If this past 
becomes once more ‘his past’ for me, that is to say a collection 
or accumulation, the possibility of ‘transliving’ it should disappear. 
It is plain that I have failed to grasp adequately that normal 
intimacy between two beings does not involve ‘transliving’. 
Yet I feel confusedly that men have done everything to make 
this experience rarer. (I should doubtless add here that in the case 


165 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of lovers, this communication has a global character, by which 
I mean that it cannot be minted in small cash, it cannot be seen 
in detail and thereby discerned clearly.) 

We now need to ask whether these reflections throw any light 
on psychometry and all that that involves. We can see at the 
outset that the fact that one of the individuals in contact is not 
physically present need not disturb us. For we are in a field in 
which signs play no part. Now, according to the standpoint I 
have adopted, the body is no more than a mechanism for sig- 
nalling. We should doubtless distinguish carefully between the 
sign or signal and the strict appeal. 


February 23rd, 1919 

It would be vain to deny that in its profounder aspects the 
question is still very obscure. In the first place we cannot help 
thinking that where there is no datum there can only be the 
potential. But that word seems to me dangerous because it is 
equivocal. I have decided only to apply it to that which is 
susceptible of being strictly given, and hence to say that the past 
is only potential inasmuch as it is treated as aggregate or collection. 
It will doubtless be objected that the pure datum is fictitious, 
that every datum should be in some degree lived, and to this 
point I willingly agree. But this has not much importance here. 
Likewise I agree that where nothing is given as datum there is 
nothing I can re-live. The datum acts as bait. And it is for this 
reason that clairvoyants ask to be brought an object, in preference 
an object that has been intimately associated with the life of the 
person about whom they are being consulted. The clairvoyant 
seems to need the object so as to recall the past that is bound up 
with it. But at this point our understanding ceases. For in what 
does the link consist? We tend to represent it materially, to con- 
vert the past into a sort of odour in the material, etc., which is 
absurd. Had the object preserved a material imprint that func- 
tioned as a sign, the sign would have to be retranscribed, etc. and 
we would be up against all the difficulties I pointed out above. 
The object seems only to act psychically, that is, as representation. 
So Task myself without yet knowing whether it is possible, nor 
even what the question means, whether the recollection of the 
object in question (this same object as re-called) is not sub- 


166 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


stituted for the initial perception that bears on it; so that, more 
or less progressively, the recollection brings with it the recon- 
struction of the surroundings, of the living past to which it 
belongs. Thus second sight would consist in elevating oneself 
from the perception of a thing to the recollection of that thing. 
To common sense this appears at the outset unintelligible, for 
it does not seem possible to dissociate the memory of the object 
' from the aggregate collection of which it forms a part—which 
is not there. By what mysterious effraction is the clairvoyant 
introduced into the aggregate or collection in question? But the 
objection supposes a postulate—namely that we begin by positing 
an irreducible duality between the ‘real’ object, (the scarf or 
glove, etc.) and the recollection of this same object, a memory 
treated as an article in the collection. Whereas even the idea of 
any such duality must be submitted to criticism. Notice, more- 
over, that between the perception of the object by a stranger, 
by no matter whom—and the memory its possessor has of it— 
we have to slip in as intermediary term the perception, with its 
memories, of the person who habitually lives with this object. 
The recollections bound up with the object are here incorporated 
with the perception itself, and form with it an entirely indivisible 
unity. Thus we have a synthesis of the images and movements 
which form the deepest reality of the object, of the object con- 
sidered as value and not simply as physical datum. The business 
of the clairvoyant is to rediscover this complex reality of the 
object. To achieve this he needs to complete and animate the 
perceptive schema to which the object is reduced for him. This, 
in all probability, is the aim of the movements the clairvoyant 
performs with the object; his movements, which resemble those 
habitually performed by the object’s owner, seem to me, as 
I see things at this moment, genuine magnetic suggestions 
exercised by the clairvoyant on this object which are intended 
to make it yield up its emotive reality, the recollection that 
is really its reality. It goes without saying that it is only 
tentatively that the clairvoyant manages to execute precisely 
those movements and not any others. ‘Thus ‘suggestivised’, the 
object transforms itself not into a piece in a collection which it is 
imagined to be by the realist theory of memory, but into the 
incarnated thought-habit which it is for its user. It is clear of 


167 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


course that what I call the suggestibility of the object is actually 
the suggestibility of the clairvoyant. The clairvoyant has to succeed 
in making the object an agent of suggestion for him. 

In other words, if] am a clairvoyant and I am brought a glove, 
that glove has to become a centre of psychical attraction for me, 
and I must in some way subordinate myself to it so that all that 
is naturally mine is for a few instants withheld and obliterated. 
That is why the clairvoyant needs to be ina trance. If he remained 
wakeful the power of suggestion that ought to emanate from the 
glove considered as spiritual presence would be annihilated in 
advance by what emanates from the clairvoyant himself when 
he imagines and constructs. 


February 24th, 1919 

Before asking how representation of a scene at a distance is 
possible (telepathic hallucination), we must question ourselves 
about the very idea of a scene. The unity of a scene, like that 
of a picture, is only psychical; hence we must either suppose 
that I see the scene itself, or else that it is projected in me as an 
image. As usually there is an interval between the time at which 
the event occurs and the time at which it is represented tele- 
pathically, we are at first tempted to suppose that a projection 
takes place, and that the scene is capable of being projected either 
before or after it happened. But 1 must confess my dissatisfaction 
with that solution. Ought we not rather to set out from the idea 
that a scene really takes place where it is lived, in other words 
that it is not riveted by essence to a certain point of space and 
of time? At first this appears absurd. For the scene brings into 
play a certain number of bodies that are situated strictly in space. 
But ought we not to distinguish carefully between the strictly 
material phenomenon which is only an abstraction (that we are 
bound to form) and the concrete scene itself? By very essence 
the phenomenon cannot be reproduced as such; or rather, were 
such reproduction realisable, it would be a second phenomenon 
analogous to the first. The phenomenon is submitted to con- 
ditions of space and time which are of necessity unique. Sup- 
posing I take as instance a shipwreck. The quality of shipwreck 
is really superimposed by me on a material phenomenon, on an 
infinitely complex and non-unifiable totality of shocks which in 


168 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


themselves have a rather distant relation to the catastrophe of 
which I am speaking. The phenomenon as such, by reason of 
its inhuman and non-psychical characteristics, cannot be an object 
of telepathy. It is capable of producing psychical effects, but it 
is also capable of being a snapshot taken mentally by an observer 
—a snapshot that can be transmitted and converted into notes 
and that is all. Moreover, telepathy would be reduced to a mini- 
mum in a world in which thought proceeded by means of 
phenomena and in which in practice people themselves could be 
likened to phenomenal elements. As soon as a scene takes place 
everything changes. The scene has a real unity, real persons take 
part in it, and it seems to me that it is through its unity and reality 
that the scene transcends the contingent conditions of its ap- 
pearance in space and time. But is it not plain that this also 
applies to memory? Are not the conditions of possibility of tele- 
pathy the same as those of memory? 

Ina word we need to be careful not to set up a duality between 
the scene and the appearance, or between the scene and the re- 
collection of it. That the recollection be the feebler need not 
surprise us, first of all because in recollection the scene, though 
conserving its unity, tends to be reduced and schematised; but 
primarily because the recollection of the recollection comes in to 
obliterate the recollection of the scene, so that a kind of composite 
and confused image tends to be substituted for the original 
recollection. As regards the appearance, it is plain @ priori that this 
is only possible in the measure in which the psychic status of 
the person who sees it permits it to occur.t 

But to return to common-sense objections. Common sense 
says that the scene cannot be immobilised unless there is an 
organism to register it, and where there is nothing of the kind it 
is unable to survive. I answer first of all that if there is really no 
one there there is no real scene. But we need to go further than 
that. The scene brings into play the motor apparatus of the 
person who is present, it thus determines an initial stage of habit, 
etc. Only these movements can be immobilised—not the scene 
itself. _It may be contested that this amounts to the same thing, 


1] am inclined to ask myself whether, where the appearance follows after the event 
and is not contemporaneous with it, it is not in reality a recollection. Without know- 
ing it I was with the dying man at the moment of his death and now I suddenly 
recall it. But of course this needs further examining and defining. 


169 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


for strictly speaking the scene is bound up with the achievement 
of those movements. But that is still far too summary. I am per- 
fectly ready to agree that in the measure in which I recall the 
scene I tend to reproduce the movements I executed at the time, 
but I am certain it is not always because I reproduce them that 
I recall them. But despite this I may be told: ‘You were not there 
to take a snapshot view of the death of your friend, so it is not 
possible that you should recall it.’ But we must notice that the 
only question we should ask is whether we were one at the 
moment when the scene took place, or if we become one sub- 
sequently, when the scene is projected in me (this supposes we 
accept the second interpretation). On reflection it is hard to see 
by what criterion we could choose between these two theses, 
since a unity of the kind in question can only be given in ex- 
perience and is strictly speaking unverifiable. It is only this unity 
that should receive the philosopher’s attention—irrespective of 
whether or not it is produced at a given and determined moment. 
For this unity to occur it seems there must first of all be an 
appeal, an invocation, an ‘abide with me’ that is more or less 
clearly enunciated. Secondly, this appeal must be heard, though 
the subject does not necessarily know that he hears it, and it is 
on the basis of this mysterious co-esse that the vision is built up. 

It is enough to reflect on a relation like that expressed by 
the word with (avec) to recognise the insufficiency and poverty of 
our logic. The word is capable of expressing relations of ever- 
increasing intimacy. I am not really with the traveller who is 
sitting next to me in the railway carriage and never addresses a 
word to me. The word with only has meaning where the unity 
is felt. A tiny incident on the journey is enough to modify 
our relationship and give a meaning to the word with. It is enough 
if some harmony, however feeble it be, is manifested between us. 
It is in these terms that we can achieve the definition of psychical 
proximity which is rightly, and doubtless also practically, dis- 
sociable from spatial proximity; and we may even need to start 
out from elementary considerations of this type if we are to 
understand the real meaning of praying for someone. From the 
religious standpoint God appears as the sole mediator who can 
permit me to be really with the person I am praying for. It is 
only by positing the necessity of that mediation that we can 


170 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


dissipate the dangers of confusion between the metaphysical 
order and the order that is strictly religious. 


February 25th, 1919 

How are we to conceive that invocation can be efficacious? 
I will proceed as I did with the problems I have already examined 
and ask about the postulates on which we spontaneously base our- 
selves if we want to dispute that efficacy. We spontaneously 
accept the view that if an appeal is to be heard, it should set in 
play a system of signs. Now, it may be said that the case I con- 
sidered yesterday consists of nothing but the idea: A thinks of B 
but it is inconceivable that a real communication can be estab- 
lished between the idea of B which is in A and the being of B 
himself. For a long time, in agreement with Bradley, I was dis- 
posed to deny even that, i.e. the absence of communication be- 
tween the idea and its object. Now I tend to believe that I was 
wrong. The idea, when it is only the idea of, should doubtless be 
conceived as isolated and cut off from its object—this is probably 
enough to bring out the metaphysical inadequacy of the idea as 
so understood. But our concern is to show that invoking a being 
is different from, and more than, thinking of him. What exactly 
do we mean by thinking of a being? We mean concentrating our 
attention on a particular system of images crystallising either 
round a special image or else round a name. ‘Thus we mean taking 
an attitude absolutely analogous to the one we adopt in the pres- 
ence of the person when that person is, for us, not a thou but a 
he. But at the moment of my invocation we must admit that 
something more than an idea comes into play. Yet the invoca- 
tion, if I may so put it, must have an ontological foundation. I 
cannot really invoke ‘anybody’; I can only ‘pretend to’ do so. In 
other words it appears as if invocation can only be efficacious 
where there is community. 

In a deep sense that is difficult to define we must be already 
together. It is possible that from the moment at which we have 
really been together for a given instant, something of this 
community remains, but I must admit that this point is exces- 
sively obscure. We would need to suppose as with the scene 
(cf. above) that the psychical unity that made us ws, is not bound 
up with a moment of time, that it reappears as soon as I put 


171 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


_myself in the state of mind which was mine when the unity was 
formed (this is a very bad way of expressing myself, but I cannot 
find any other). In consequence, the invocation, now fortified 
(or, more exactly, nourished) by this real unity would enable 
me to communicate with the other person, grasped not simply 
as somebody else but as chou. What is obviously very singular 
is that the other can fail to be immediately aware of the appeal 
addressed to him. Then in what way is he ‘attained’? The current 
terminology of psychology enables us to say that it is his un- 
conscious that is attained. But this answer, so worded, is abso- 
lutely meaningless. 


February 26th, 1919 


For what is this unconscious? Can it be said to be the person 
in question inasmuch as he possesses a certain number of pre- 
dicates that he does not know he possesses? That interpretation 
seems to me unacceptable. Let us proceed in our usual way. Let 
us take any type of communication at random. A writes a letter 
to B. B receives it. What happens? The letter is literally recetved 
—exactly in the sense in which a telegram or a radio message is 
received, that is to say ‘captured’. This letter contains infor- 
mation, it tells B that A has just been ill, that he has recovered 
and is off on a journey, etc. In what sense is B ‘attained’ by 
this message? If he is merely informed and not moved by its 
contents, he only treats A as a piece of paper that he takes out 
of one drawer in his card-index and puts into another. In this 
case A is exclusively him for B. And, by that very fact, B is as 
little as can be for himself; he appears to himself as no more 
than a ‘science’, a group of notions associated together. Now 
‘suppose this letter to have an immediate emotive value. ‘My dear 
friend, I am done for . . .’ Straightway B’s attitude is trans- 
formed. Now only the word we can express the relation of being 
to being that is set up between B and A (the term relation is 
itself inexact, for there is nothing here that can be understood 
discursively). There is compassion, commiseration. This shows 
itself by an incapacity to judge or predicate. But what is B when 
he becomes compassionate? He is revealed to himself. In principle 
nothing takes us more by surprise than our own emotions; 
it is part of the nature and I would almost like to add part of the 


172 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


duty of a feeling that it should to some extent ignore itself. 
This unknown element in a being which is revealed in emotion 
and makes up his value can in no way be treated as fe or it. 
It is incontestably this that is accessible to invocation. I am fully 
aware of the contradiction in terms here. But it only goes to 
shew that we ought to look beyond words. 

I quite realise that I may be told that in the case of the letter 
_ that arouses emotion, the signs or symbols play an essential and 
indispensable part; for we agree that they unleash emotion and 
we find it natural that they should do so because they operate 
immediately. But here we seem to be content with mere words. 
What matters is the transition from the him to the us, that is, 
to the experience of community. Now I do not think that this 
transition can be explained in mechanical terms. Emotion makes 
me come into the scene, it forces the hidden me to ‘emerge’—the 
I which, as long as we were only concerned with classifying or 
with the revision of a classification, stayed ‘behind the curtain.’ 


February 27th, 1919 

It appears to me obvious that to move with emotion means 
to ‘force to emerge’, to mobilise. . . . But in what sense can 
we speak of emotion as having a strictly ontological value? Of 
course what is vulgarly called ‘imaginary’ can be just as efficacious 
as reality. But what is the value of this distinction? 

Emotion only occurs with the ‘breaking’ or ‘loosening of an 
adaptational bond’. But why does the rupture coincide with the 
‘emergence’ of the I to which I have just referred? This question is 
obscure. What is the relation between the ego and the bonds 
of reciprocal adaptation which in emotion are relaxed or broken? 
It cannot be said that these bonds simply cover up the ego. I 
take as example.the stable sentiment of a man’s attachment 
to his wife. One day he discovers that she is being unfaithful 
to him. Hence the rupture I have spoken of and the ‘emergence’ 
of the ego. A substantialist or phenomenalist type of interpre- 
tation is here insufficient and does hot even allow us to ask the 
relevant questions. When it is emotionally attached the ego is lost 
in its object,or more exactly in the activities that concern its object. 
By that I mean that the attachment excludes any real division into 
two. Naturally the subject may become aware of his attachment 


173 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


and know that he experiences it; but between himself and his 
attachment no living relationship is established—and, in his eyes, 
the attachment tends to be converted into something inert and 
inanimate. It is the equivalent of a predicate that applies to me 
inasmuch as I myself arn him for myself; inasmuch as I know 
myself. Here emotion functions as a recall: “The question con- 
cerns me, and I didn’t realise it’+ The ‘Oh but’ which is at the 
root of the emotion sheds a retrospective clarity on what it 
interrupts or transforms. It recalls to me that it is impossible for 
me in last analysis to treat myself as him; or, more exactly, it is that 
recall itself. 


March ist, 1919 


On the Essais of Pére Laberthonniére. We need to question 
ourselves as closely as possible on what we mean by ‘affirming 
being’ or even by ‘stating the problem of being’. This second 
phrase consists fundamentally in asking ourselves whether there 
is being, before we know what being is. But what do we mean 
when we ask this question? Contemporary writers tend to con- 
vert it into a problem of value. But that I think is dangerous. 
To have—to possess—a value must not be confounded with being 
a value; and now I must ask myself whether this last expression 
has any meaning. The relations expressed by the verb zo have 
seem to me to have been badly defined. It can be argued that 
the fact of existing constitutes a value; but this would need 
to be defined exactly. Note that if we state the problem of being 
in the form: ‘Is there being?’ we suppose a high level of pre- 
liminary reflection. What would be the positive implications of 
the statement: “There is no being’? That there are only phenomena. 
But this is only true in appearance. The phenomenon is only 
classified as phenomenon in contrast with an idea that is admitted 
to have no application. 


March 2nd, 1919 


“To come from myself’, “To come from elsewhere’-—what do 
those expressions mean? (as applied to the ouidja board, dreams, 
creativeness, etc.). 


1 The idea of the ego is ambiguous; the ego is J inasmuch as thee—as in this particular 
case—or inasmuch as him. 


174 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


It seems clear that when I gather information this comes from 
a source distinct from myself, and to that extent comes from 
elsewhere. Moreover, I may inform someone else, and thus myself 
function as a ‘source of information’. At this moment I am not 
trying to get to the bottom cf this latter activity which is only 
apparently clear. What is plain is that I am only a ‘source of 
information’ for somebody else, that is to say inasmuch as I am— 

‘for myself or for another—somebody else, that I participate in 
the nature of somebody else. Inasmuch as I am ego I am absolutely 
unable to give information. The opposition between ‘me’ and 
‘elsewhere’ is thus in no way comparable to the opposition that 
would exist between “a given source’ and ‘another given source’. 
To say that something created ‘comes from’ me is meaningless. 
But, it may be objected, at least I can legitimately contrast the 
fact of inventing with that of informing. But that is not the question. 
In reality we are setting out from the pseudo-idea according to 
which each of us possesses a certain fund of information drawn 
from elsewhere, and from this fund we extract certain combina- 
tions. But what we (?) extract in this way is as little ours as could 
possibly be. 

It seems true to say that the more I am myself the less I 
contrast myself with others as a source can be contrasted with 
other sources. The more I treat myself as a guide-book, the less 
I think of myself as myself. 

About some given inspiration we ask: ‘Does it come from me 
or from elsewhere?’ But the inspiration cannot be compared to a 
group of signs or symbols. To say “This idea comes from me,’ 
means ‘It does not come from someone’, or ‘It is meaningless 
to ask where it comes from.’ We need to disentangle its positive 
counterpart from this negation. 


March 3rd, 1919 

I take up again what I tried to point out yesterday. Everything 
that is communicated by signs strictly emanates from a source. 
I receive some signals. I am bound to ask myself who sent them, 
where they come from. All information implies signs. I will not 
try here to go deeper into the nature of what I call information 


1 Tt must be understood that ‘to come from’ is to come from a source, and that at the 
ego is absolutely not a source, there is no sense in saying that this comes from me. 


175 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


(it could be shown to be something aimed at orientating me, or 
at augmenting my capacity for action or reaction). I can function 
as a source of information in that I am a definite someone, a him, 
who hasa history, a certain aggregate of experiences at his disposal, 
each of which can be liberated from its context—that is to say, 
probably, in that I am not myself or more exactly / (because I 
have shown that J am defined by the fact of not being a given 
someone). Hence if anyone asks ‘Who has given him this infor- 
mation?’—the name of the best hotel in Paris—I could answer 
‘I did: that information comes from me’; me, only being here 
equivalent to a definite so and so. The more the information con- 
cerns something external (this needs further clarification) the 
more easily I can reply to the question, and the more the dis- 
tinction between what I know (what I can furnish) and what I do 
not know (what I cannot furnish) is valid; but the less the word 
me is taken in its genuine, essential sense. Now when we are 
dealing with an appreciation or an idea, this question ceases to 
have a clear meaning. Why? That about which we can say it 
comes from me belongs to a collection or aggregate, i.e. that which 
is not me. It could be said that in the spiritual order the question 
regarding the source of origin can only be asked about that 
which can be inventoried. What exactly do we mean when we 
declare that the question regarding the source of origin cannot 
apply in the case of an experience, an idea or an inspiration? 

I note here that the means by which we communicate with 
ourselves are not really different from the means by which we 
communicate with others. I may be told that we have a feeling 
regarding our own life very different from any feeling we can 
have about the life of others. True enough. But this feeling is 
not a communication with ourselves, it is what I call a manner of 
being. The unconscious is that—within us (?) with which we have 
no dialectical communication. What does ‘within us’ mean? 

We must of course resist the temptation to treat the J as a 
‘container’. There is even an idealist theory that succumbs to 
it—the theory that the body is in the mind. The body is no more 
in the mind than the piano is in the music that it plays. Of 
course, doubtless only ‘containers’ can communicate. When we 
look on one another as capable of communication we inevitably 
treat ourselves as containing contents. It is worth noticing that 


176 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the spiritualist theory of atomism which isolates the conscious- 
ness of A from that of B does not avoid this necessity. But 
it must also be noted that A and B are not isolated inasmuch 
as they are non-communicating precisely because we, cannot 
legitimately compare them to containers; it is in that we are 
isolated that we can communicate. 


March 5th, 1919 


The word ‘tabulation’ or ‘repertory’ (repertoire) is the best word 
for describing what the ego is not. I am—I think and I act only 
because I do not function as a tabulation.1 To say that the idea 
as such has no source of origin is to say that it should only be 
treated as an act, as devoid of any place in a pre-existing tabu- 
lation. On the other hand every idea, when expressed, appears 
to be introduced into the tabulation that corresponds to it, it 
tends by that very fact to imitate itself and reproduce itself. 
Tabulation is the Aim. 


March 6th, 1919 


When we recollect, do we extract from a tabulation? I note 
first of all that a tabulation only involves answers prepared for 
someone else, destined for someone else, whoever he may be, 
even if only myself as someone else. To know is in this sense to 
be in a state to carry out this or that given operation (here one 
thinks of the repertory or tabulation of the singer or the surgeon, 
the repertory or tabulation of a theatre or of guide-books). To 
say ‘I do not know’ in this sense signifies “This has no place in my 
tabulation.’ I wonder whether even Bergson’s pure recollections 
do not lead to a tabulation. The whole problem of pure memory 
lies there. | 

To learn always means to set up a mechanism, and to increase 
the scope of one’s repertory or tabulation.” But this in no way ex- 
hausts thecontent of theidea of experience. Whatis deep in the fact of 
experience cannot be reduced to the act of learning. To learn is 
always to refer oneself to something further, to put oneself into 
the state in which one can carry out certain operations when the 


1 Transition to the only intelligible notion of radical freedom. ; 
2] leave aside the metaphysical question of how a being is able to learn, At bottom it 
is Ravaisson’s problem of habit. 


G 177 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


circumstances require it. In crude spatial imagination this is 
symbolised by hoarding or gathering in provisions, whereas 
really it consists in multiplying our active powers. In this sense 
to learn is not to live in the present, or rather it is to abstract 
from the lived present. (I am fully aware that I am hovering over 
the Bergsonian distinction. . . .) It is for that reason that there is 
such a deep difference between learning and enjoying ( jouzr). It is 
easy to find concrete illustrations. We may poison our aesthetic 
enjoyment if we ask: ‘Am I profiting from what I see? Would I re- 
cognise this work again? How? Iflater ] am asked this or that ques- 
tion would I be able to answer?’ Of course there is a counterpart 
to this in the instance of suffering. Must we say that experience 
as such (das Erleben) survives itself both as pure experience and 
as mechanical aptitude? But how could it be conserved as pure 
experience? The idea of conservation here seems meaningless 
(cf. my earlier reflections on this point). It is better to say that 
the experience is incorporated in our being, and in consequence 
transforms it, and that it is in this sense that it continues to live 
on in us. Yes, it is a living accretion (for example, an air that we 
have heard and that we can reproduce tends at the same time to 
enrich our being). Ought we to go on to say that it serves to 
increase our apperceptive ‘substance’, i.e. that with which we 
appreciate, that with which we evaluate the universe? I am con- 
vinced of it. But how comes it that in our apperceptive ‘substance’ 
the experience is still capable of freeing itself for itself, of re- 
becoming for itself? Inevitably we are tempted to treat it as an 
element juxtaposed to other elements and as such capable of 
being rediscovered in the total (a -+- b=S; hence a is still in S). 
Memory in this sense is certainly a mode of being; I am what I 
recall in the measure in which I relive it. But can we say that that 
is, in the measure in which I am not it? Does recollection survive 
inasmuch as it is not relived? ‘Yes,’ it is argued, ‘but in the state of 
potentiality.’ But it seems to me here that we are once again 
adopting the standpoint of the repertory or tabulation. In a word 
it is tempting to think that I cannot rediscover a state unless this 
state has lasted as long as me and with me, whether within me 
or not. But when I reflect that seems to me absurd. ‘Then’ remains 
‘then’—it does not become ‘now’. What happens is that I rejoin 
my past—it is not exact to say that my past has followed me and 


178 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


in some way travelled along with me. Recollection does not 
grow old, it only has one age, which is strictly its own. It is for 
this reason that a contingent fact (Proust’s mouthful of cake) 
unleashes in us an experience which is in principle identical with 
the experience we originally underwent, though it cannot be 
said in any way that this experience has been conserved, because 
to be conserved is a manner of growing old, of changing. 

I must admit that I am not at all satisfied by this explanation 
and I do not know at what end to tackle this awkward question. 
Nevertheless, I have a feeling that I am making progress, if only 
very slowly. When I say that another mind is external in relation 
to mine, I unquestionably treat us both as repertories or tabula- 
tions that do not coincide but are mutually susceptible of com- 
pleting each other.... It seems to me that it is always the 
body that learns. The mind lends itself to this discipline and that 
is all. 

Being is that which does not frustrate our expectation; there is 
being from the moment at which our expectation is fulfilled—I 
mean the expectation in which we wholly participate. The doctrine 
that denies being can be expressed by the phrase: ‘All is vanity’, in 
other words that we must expect nothing, and only the man who 
expects nothing will avoid being disappointed. I believe that it is 
only on this basis that the problem can be stated. To say: “Nothing 
is’ is to say “Nothing matters’. I must make a deeper examination 
of the meaning of this kind of nihilism. ‘Take care not to confound 
‘to be’ with ‘to exist.’ Show the bond between the problem of 
absolute value and that of substance; substantiality considered 
as the guarantee of value; is there any basis for this impression? 


March 17th, 1919 

But this is still too vague. J see well enough that being is fullness 
—but this expression must not be taken to mean a synthesis of 
intellectual determinations; (or anything resembling the Ens 
Realissimum as it is habitually conceived). We must proceed 
much more methodically. To ask ourselves if there is being is, 
I think, to adopt the standpoint of the man who gets—or who 
would like to get—to the bottom of things, who sees—or who 
would like to see—through the tissue of phenomena (the veil 
of happening). The affirmation ‘Nothing is’ is made to seem the 


179 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


expression of the highest wisdom, of the richest experience, 
and such superlatives mean that this wisdom or this experience 
appears to themselves to exhaust the content of life. There is a sense 
in which life can certainly be compared to a test or to a sifting of 
this kind. As we progress in life we come to discern better what 
resists it and what does not resist it, what evaporates and what 
remains at the bottom of the crucible. The man who says ‘All 
is vanity’ can only speak in the name of one experience, whether 
it be literally his or he has appropriated—of course in idea— 
that of someone else. That experience, that life is, if you like, 
also a dialectic in that it implies the reflection of self on self— 
and it is woith noticing the characteristics of that reflection. 

Take as example the voluptuary who little by little detaches 
himself from the objects to which he was attached at the outset 
of his career. He now appears to himself—as seeing through his 
previous experience. In other words his present experience, his 
present manner of appreciation, is not simply juxtaposed to the 
experiences that have gone before; it lays claim to a sort of onto- 
logical priority. This is of extreme importance for the problem 
of being. To be, here, means to survive the test, to survive 
progressive dissolution. To deny being is to claim that nothing 
can survive the test. But here we come up against a serious 
ambiguity; is it in fact or by right that nothing can survive the 
test? I imagine I may be answered: “By right,’ meaning that the 
experience of the man who dares to affirm being has been in- 
complete; that the believer—to take a particular,instance—has 
failed to see through his faith. If this were so the affirmation of 
being would always be an interpretation of an experience that 
had been imperfectly reflected. ‘The imperfect reflection might 
well be explained by the fortuitous and favourable experiences 
from which the given person had benefited, or, the person himself 
might be directly responsible for his own blindness. But the 
meaning of this second alternative would require very close 
examination. To deny being, then, is to posit deception as 
universal by right: but does not this involve reference to a 
singularly formal conception of universality? Indeed it seems as if 
the intention were to say that when any mind in good faith follows 
this dialectic to the end it must recognise that nothing is left 
(cf. the logic of making use of death for this apologetic of 


180 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


nothingness). It would of course be vain to recognise the vital 
value of illusion and the advantages that may lie in not pushing 
such reflection to its final limit. 

It seems to me essential to agree that such pessimism is by 
right possible, that the possibility is bound up with the very 
nature of reflection. Perhaps we must even admit that a world 
in which such pessimism were not at least abstractly possible 
would lack religious value. The objection may be made that if 
there are other worlds in which this world is remembered, some 
day the pessimist himself may well become aware of his past 
mistake and see through it. To this we may be obliged to answer 
that we cannot think the other world in that way, i.e. we cannot 
install ourselves in it by a purely empirical effort of imagination. 
And so we will be told: “Thus absolute pessimism is possible. 
There is a sense in which being can be denied. But who can 
say that this sense is not final? that such pessimism is not 
valid?’ 

Here we must ask the question which is really denied by the 
man who posits that absolute pessimism is valid: by what in his 
view is this doctrine or experience opposed? In what instance 
would he consider himself obliged to bring it back into doubt? 
Apparently his pessimism seems to him valid if it is in conformity 
with the facts; and invalid if it is not. But what content has the 
idea of fact? The ambiguity lies precisely there. To be converted 
(in the purely rational sense) the pessimist would need a fact 
(which reflection could to some extent support rather than see 
through in order to lose itself in non-being, a fact on which to 
end up). At bottom we are still dealing with the opposition 
between the full and the empty—an opposition which is infi- 
nitely more essential than that of the single and the multiple. 

Hence, in a ‘word, for me being is defined as that which does 
not allow itself to be dissolved by the dialectics of experience 
(experience as it reflects itself). Does this mean saying that 
being can be a content ranged beside other contents? Certainly 
not. There is not and could not be a privileged content which 
would be being, or more simply which would be, whereas other 
contents were not. Being, as I have said, stands firm against the 
test or trial of life. But is this not a sort of ideal limit? There is a 
need to go deeply into the idea of the resistance opposed by 


181 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


being to the wearing process that criticism imposes on it. It is 
certain that only life can hold out under this test. And it would 
be insane to believe that what is lifeless is spared by it. What 
is the life which holds out under the test of life? That must be 
discovered. No one must be surprised at my using the word life 
twice over here; for we are dealing with a criticism of life by life 
itself. But then is not being the truth? Is being confounded with 
the true? At first sight it would seem so since it is the true that 
is established by criticism. But surely the true is only an abstract 
limit. It remains to be shown that the true does not account 
for the false, that it lets it subsist without integrating it, and, 
moreover, that it (the true) is only clearly defined for us in the 
order of ideal possibilities, not in a universe that permits of detail. 
We should be able to talk of an act which attains being—whereas 
truth is only the object set before itself by our will. An ambiguous 
object, moreover, as often as not. 

At this point I should demonstrate that being cannot be a 
simple limit, that it is something which must be possessed.1 Yet 
the true can provide a sort of ontological intimacy; show what 
is illusory in this. The true certainly cannot be adored, there 
is nothing adorable about it save the will that pursues it with 
obstinacy. 


March 8th, 1919 


Seek out the sense in which the very possibility of a truth is 
bound up with the particular and contingent nature of our 
thought. To be examined more deeply. 

The Cogito. We must grasp that nothing is less instruc tive 
than the Cartesian ‘I am’. It could be taken to mean ‘I am a 
substance’. All that Descartes shows is that the question of 
existence—I would like to say of objective correspondence— 
cannot even be raised (a fortiori cannot permit a negative 
answer) where we are concerned with the ego inasmuch as it is 
thinking. 

It may seem strange that I should identify, as I have done, the 
problem of being and the problem of salvation. Are not those who 
deny being also those who refuse to subtend a substantial basis 
underneath phenomena? But I think that here we have a series 


1 But, of course, not as a predicate. 


182 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


of confusions. No one can maintain any longer that a phenomenon 
is a manifestation of being—to be more exact, this formula is 
far too ambiguous to be informative. It introduces an unintel- 
ligible duality between being and the phenomenon. If there 
is a sense in which being can affirm itself, this is because 
there is a sense in which the phenomenon can be grasped as 
being. 

A much more interesting question is whether the test or trial 
in the sense in which I have defined it, is contingent in relation 
to being. The problem is real and important, but cannot be set 
out in these terms, I think, because the expression Jeing is itself 
inadequate and meaningless. When we turn being into a noun 
we seem implicitly to be asking ourselves what predicates it can 
take. And that is unintelligible. Once more I resume where I left 
off yesterday: to deny being is to claim that nothing can right- 
fully hold out against full experience. I am tempted to say to the 
metaphysical nihilist: “But zs this experience itself in being?’ 
Is that a legitimate question and how can he answer it? To me 
it appears evident that he does not even dream of asking it of 
himself, because he views this inquiry as contingent in relation 
to the result that he awaits from it. But that result, however 
negative it may be, is an answer. T’o say that the universe leaves 
me dissatisfied, and that in this sense it ‘ts not’ is to admit that 
within me there is an appetite for being. I can conceive, of course, 
a subjective nihilism which would even go so far as to contest 
the reality of this appetite, or at least accuse me of miscon- 
struing its real significance. Such nihilism would tend, I suppose, 
to view this appetite as no more than the expression of a nature 
that affirms itself. What, then, in my view, is this will for being? 
Is it a will to find myself or a will to create myself? But this 
either-or is far from clear. Under what conditions could I myself 
appear to myself as real? In what sense am I not real? Is it inasmuch 
as I am dependent? Is ‘to will to be’ necessarily the same as “to 
will to be for oneself’? If we define will in this way do we not 
condemn ourselves to viewing it as illusory? Clearly all these 
reflections gravitate round a living centre of thought that I have 
not managed to attain directly. I have said that the discovery 
of being would mean the elevation of oneself to a mode of 
experience or of life over which critical experience no longer 


183 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


had any hold. And that, I think, amounts to admitting that there 


is no being save in eternity. 


March toth, 1919 


To will is to refuse to ask the question of possibility, or at least 
it is to refuse to treat it as primary. In this sense volition implies 
the equivalent of a judgment incontestably demonstrated (for 
when I say ‘This or that is necessary’ I do not ask myself whether 
this or that can be). To will means in some way to place ourselves 
beyond the point at which we can distinguish the possible 
from the impossible. But is this not the purely logical aspect of 
faith? The man who asks himself whether he is able, and enu- 
merates the obstacles, does not will in the strict sense of the word. 
He assures us that ‘he would like to, but . . .’, whereas will 
ignores duts. J only will from the moment at which I make a 
tabula rasa of all duts: though strictly speaking I know them, 
I know them as suppressed. Now in what measure can it be said 
that the will sets aside real possibilities that may take their revenge 
when the opportunity occurs? Or in what measure does it 
effectively suppress what it denies? That is a difficult question. 

To be sure there is a difference between will and faith: 
indeed will seems to bear on what is to be, faith on what is. But 
the ‘present’ (?) of the object of faith certainly cannot be con- 
trasted with the future of an object of willing as a now can be 
contrasted with a /ater. This again is very important. 

The question that the will sets aside is that of knowing 
whether a given action can be accomplished: the question that 
faith refuses to ask is: ‘Is it really possible?” Yet the meaning of 
this distinction is not as clear as it seems. The 4uts of the man 
who would like to will and does not will always bear on conditions 
that are thought as existent and as incompatible with the achieve- 
ment in question. The man who says: ‘I would like to pass this 
examination but I won’t be able to,’ places himself in advance 
at the critical moment and, by his evocation of them, raises the 
very obstacles that he thinks are bound to paralyse him (ner- 
vousness, bad memory, etc.). In a word in each case there is 
question of not positing what, with Leibnitz, we can call the 
‘problem of compossibility.’ The believer does not ask himself 
—he refuses to ask himself—whether divine perfection is incom- 


184 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


patible with the imperfections of the universe as it is presented 
to him; the man who wills refuses to ask himself if what he 
wishes to do is compatible with the ‘drawbacks’ of every kind 
that he observes in and around him. In both cases I indicate this 
‘overcoming’ by the expression ‘act of transcendence’. 

‘But,’ it can be argued, ‘though I may will to set aside these 
incompatibilities, I do not necessarily succeed.’ To this I think 
we must answer that inasmuch as I will no such dissociation is 
affected. (The limits of my willing—also, perhaps, of my faith— 
would be the limits of my power of transcendence.) Doubtless 
experience of a particular drawback helps to paralyse my will- 
power; it brings in doubt and tends to substitute an ‘I should’— 
with its nuance of uncertainty—for the ‘I must.’ Hence a struggle 
occurs when consciousness recognises the probable inefficacy 
of such a mitigated statement, and endeavours to react against it; 
hence tension, determination and powerlessness. Thus there is 
no will unless there is real detachment, i.e. detachment that is 
not recognised as such. To will is not to simplify oneself, but 
to have simplified and even sacrificed oneself to such an extent 
that the idea of this sacrifice no longer survives. In this way I 
am able to triumph over the obstacles within me, that is, to negate 
or suppress them as such; and in this way, doubtless, the will is 
likewise able to master external obstacles or, to put it more exactly, 
the external forces that serve as obstacles for what in us does not 
want to suceed, does not want to act—in a word, does not will. 
Here it seems to me that the will functions as power, though it is 
in no way a force; it acts by suppression and so to speak by 
taking the obstacle in its stride. Hence also we can agree that 
the will, as Descartes thought, is ‘infinite-—there is nothing in 
it that can be graduated. It has no intensity and, like a pure 
statement, it does not permit of degrees. 

*Yet’—another objection—T can only will what is within 
my power.? But this is far from clear; because willing means 
saying: “This ought to be, hence this is within my power.’ Then 
the ‘this ought to be’ is only possible under certain conditions. 
Between ‘that? and ‘me’ there must be a certain relation. It 
seems to me that to will is in some way to commit oneself; by 


1 This formula would imply the obviously mistaken idea that the will has or is a deter- 
mined quantum of force—like a lever that is capable of some actions but not of others. 


G* 185 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


which I mean to commit or bring into play one’s own reality; 
to throw oneself into what one wills. I would be tempted to go 
so far as to say that to will is to affirm. ‘I depend on that (I will 
only be if that is), hence that depends on me.’ But of course this 
I and this me are not really identical; between them there is a 
synthetic and living relation. 

Here is an example. I resolve to finish a piece of work. 
I commit myself with myself to do it. That is to say I bring my 
own reality in some way into play upon the matter. I will not 
be in my own eyes unless that piece of work is finished. If I 
fail there would be a sort of collapse of myself. Hence that piece 
of work must Je able to be finished. The affirmation that this 
depends on me is itself an act of will, a decree. Wherever we have 
to deal with will, I think, we find that to resolve is to commit 
oneself with oneself. If I fail, I will have deceived my expecta- 
tions; I will have shown myself not to be up to the level at which 
I thought I was. 

It is hard to see anything of this kind in faith. Yet I can only 
have faith in what I am or, to be more exact, in that by which I 
am. I mean that faith could not have bearing on a metaphysical 
order that was radically foreign to me (any more than I would 
be able really to will something in which my being was not 
concerned). And it could be said that we have a sort of symmetry 
here; whereas will is brought to bear on what cannot be save 
through me, faith is brought to bear on that by which I am. 
But I have said that faith implies the refusal to ask certain ques- 
tions or to question oneself about certain possibilities. Which? 
And in what does our justification of the refusal consist? Here 
again the foundation can only be positive. 

I return once more to the last phrases I wrote the day before 
yesterday. I said then that critical experience is only unable to 
gnaw on the eternal. But this is not clear. There must be no 
question of our understanding by ‘eternal’ that which is valid 
for anyone whatsoever at any moment of time whatsoever, that is, 
the purely indeterminate, the unspecified in itself. 


March 11th 


I come back once again to what I said about will, which seems 
to me clearer and more positive than what concerns faith. To 


186 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


be able to will, we must first of all have conceived. Volition 
presupposes a whole round of judgments and a previous intel- 
lectual organisation. We must know what we want; there 
is thus a content—more exactly, a schema which is filled out 
as the action is accomplished. Fundamentally we cannot know 
whether we are able until we try; and everything depends on the 
whole-heartedness of the attempt. 

Here is an important and curious problem. Is to feel the 
Same as to communicate? It seems to me it is clearly not the 
same. A feeling is not a sign or symbol, and though it can be 
treated as such that is quite a different matter. I think Dewey 
has made this clear. It is very important for our idea of the nature 


of knowing. 
March 12th, 1919 


We have a tendency to look on sensation as produced in us, so 
to speak, by the object, and as giving us information about 
it. That interpretation is absurd. I would like to define why 
it is absurd, and to understand where we get to when we 
reject it. 

To feel is to be affected in a given manner; and we should 
ask whether the very ambiguity of the word has not a profound 
and real foundation. 

Doubtless we must proceed as in the past and try to define 
what we spontaneously believe or accept. In sensation we seem to 
look on the object as delivering to us a part of itself. I mean 
that we surely do not spontaneously posit the object as distinct 
from the ‘signs’ which ‘emanate’ from it; and it is for that reason 
that sensation was not originally regarded as a sign. The idea 
of the propagation of transmissions or commotions originates 
with science and hence it came late. It is plain that anyone who 
tries to conciliate the naive and common-sense realist view of 
sensation with the mechanist interpretation of science must 
suppose that between the object and us a communication is 
established of the same type as that linking two telegraph offices 
or two wireless stations. But has this any meaning? No, precisely 
because sensation is affection, not information. 

In a word sensation can only be treated as a sign or symbol 
in function of an object; that is, when it ceases to be an affection 


187 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


and a manner of being and becomes a reference. Now it is of the 
definition of sensation that it is not referred. 

All this needs to be taken up again methodically. But here 
is a preliminary pointer. We say: ‘It must be that I am affected 
by something.’ But it is here exactly that I see the confusion. 
Inasmuch as I experience a sensation, the question has no meaning; 
it only has meaning in the measure in which I cease to experience 
the initial state so as, however confusedly, to think it—so as to 
detach myself from it. 


March 13th, 1919 

Had an interesting conversation yesterday with P. Admitting 
in principle the possibility of a ‘mind’ (define) utilising the 
repertory or tabulation of someone living (mine for instance), 
I suggested the idea that that ‘mind’ might be sufficiently ‘sug- 
gestible’ to be plunged once again by us, through our will for 
communication, into the world of signs from which death (?) 
withdrew it, so that it would make an effort—entirely illusory 
in its very principle—to recall what we asked of it, and would 
seek, in our collection or aggregate of ‘notes’ for the means of 
satisfying us.. . . I admit that this hypothesis is extremely bold. 
But at least it partially accounts for the facts. If it is true we can 
understand why we needed to lend ourselves, that is to say to 
lend our body, to the ‘mind’; if we put up a resistance, communi- 
cation (the word is improper because we are really dealing with a 
partial substitution) would become impossible. 

I would like to take this up more methodically, because it may 
well be that the hypothesis raises other difficulties that are 
insurmountable. In the first place, under what conditions would 
evocation in the strict sense be possible? To evoke a being, have 
we really to invoke it? Unquestionably it seems as if some beings 
are evoked when we are in no way thinking about them. But it 
must be admitted that this is bound up with questions that are 
in practice insoluble: we do not know how a body ‘in a trance’ 
or ‘in the process of going into a trance’ can appear to a ‘mind’ 
that is animated by the will to communicate. The body needs 
in some way to be given to it (it makes itself felt). How? The 
problem would doubtless seem absurd to almost eveybody, but 
my tendency to think that the body must have a sort of psychic 


188 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


reality, and that without it life would be inconceivable, is not of 
recent growth. Yet even in my eyes this statement is very vague. 
What I mean is that the body should be capable of being appre- 
hended as psychical, as a psychic unity, with an apprehension 
that cannot be compared to a mode of perception. This would 
doubtless be an incipient action and susceptible of being thwarted 
or even totally ‘inhibited’ by the subject himself. 

As I have already pointed out we should never speak here of 
communication, but only of substitution or possession. I can only 
communicate with someone else through signs or symbols. Now 
no exchange of signs is possible between this ‘mind’ and me, 
since this ‘mind’ is only expressed through me and thanks to 
what it borrows from me (so that I naturally keep asking myself 
whether all that occurs does not ‘come’ from me). But how does 
the ‘mind’ preserve its power of selection? How does it manage 
to make use of the instrument I loan to it? Must we not suppose 
that when it becomes incarnate it recovers a—very partial— 
faculty of ‘re-memoration’ that it was incapable of possessing 
‘beforehand’ (has this adverb a meaning?). Ina word I would say 
that it only becomes once more capable of making use of the 
instrument when it is furnished with it, at which time it becomes 
a complete living being. The ‘mind’ is there, it is where my 
body is, just as I am, and a precarious sort of psychical symbiosis 
is established between it and me. This allows us to understand 
the mistakes that are always being detected, as well as the ‘mind’s’ 
incapacity to give information regarding its new surrounding. 
The surroundings cease to be its own as soon as it becomes 
incarnate and it only keeps, doubtless, a confused recollection 
of them. Moreover, it could only inform us about them by 
communicating with us; now it is us or at least forms with us a 
whole which for the moment cannot be decomposed. 

This hypothesis is the only one that corresponds to my 
experience. I have certainly had the feeling that beings were 
making use—very unequally good use—of the instrument I lent 
them. We can see why a struggle should repeatedly occur between 
the medium who is insufficiently in a trance, who reacts—and 
the ‘mind’ to which the medium does not lend himself without 
reserve. I would like to call this the struggle for the instrument. 

I will make no further insistence on such reflections as these. 


189 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


Though they are very interesting they do not yet permit of a 
philosophical elucidation that is entirely satisfying. 

And once again I resume with what I have already said about 
the object. The more I think it as object the less I need to appear 
to myself as consubstantial with it. As object it appears to me 
to be in communication with me. But in that measure I too 
become an object, or more exactly another receiving and trans- 
mitting station. 


March 17th, 1919 

Yesterday I was reflecting on the suggestibility of the ‘mind.’ 
I tend more and more to believe that it is ‘ravished’—which 
would explain the para-amnesia we observe so often. ‘It’ has no 
power of reaction to the suggestion we throw out—no power 


of rejection, so to speak, such as we possess. To be examined 
further. 


March 21st, 1919 


Is the memory a mode of communication between the actual me 
and the me of the past? I hope no one will object that, for this 
to be so, the me of the past would need to be still in being. For 
we are precisely involved in finding out whether it is true that 
that me is no more. Those who see the brain as the essential 
agent of memory convert memory into a mode of communi- 
cation . . . whereas I think of memory not as communication 
but as incomplete possession. At given moments we have all 
felt ourselves to be invaded by the past. Now I glimpse con- 
fusedly that there is no sense in saying: it is there or it is not there 
regarding that which is susceptible of invading us and possessing 
us in this way. These expressions are only applicable to objects 
which by their essence can be given a site and marked out. Only 
that which cannot be thought of as being in communication with 
us is really incapable of being situated in relation to us. Com- 
munication means being oneself—while the someone else remains 
himself. Yet a given communication may affect me (there is 
possibly a difficulty here). 


April 3rd, 1919 
_Working on Bradley recently. Thanks to him and also to con- 
190 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


versation with H. I feel I am on the track of entirely new ideas. 
I accepted the idea that the ‘mind’ is disincarnate much too 
easily. Whereas in reality it seems to be ‘otherwise incarnate.’ 
Moreover, can my body become its body if it itself lacks a body? 
In a word what occurs is a very short symbiosis between the 
organism (?) of the mind and my organism. This idea seems to me 
more acceptable than that of a pure and simple substitution; 
and it is only if there are two bodies (of different type) present 
that we can understand genuine communications and the phe- 
nomena of ‘materialisation’. What we call materialisation can 
only be the condensation of another matter, the transition from 
one material plane to another. 


April 6th 


Reflected again on the bases of psychometry and the materialist 
interpretation that can be made of it. I admit that the thing 
(here distinguished from the object) has been modified by con- 
tact—that is certain. I admit that it has kept the imprint (or 
‘fluid’ trace) of the subject A. I furthermore admit, though not 
so easily, that the believer has a ‘sense’ that allows him to discern 
the imprint or alteration. Yet the solid problem remains: How 
are we to trace back this effect to its cause or to its context? 
Whatever people may think the fact that the modification in 
question can only be apprehended by a being endowed with 
privileged ‘faculties’ in no way helps to make intelligible the tran- 
sition by which the thought of the clairvoyant passes from this 
modification (which is in some way observed) to its cause (it 
is manifest, moreover, that we have nothing here resembling a 
causal inference). The transition cannot be understood in prin- 
ciple unless it implies a ‘re-integration’ i.e. unless the unity of 
the whole which comprehended this modification within itself 
is re-formed (for example I enter a room and breathe a scent that 
makes me say immediately, ‘So-and-so was here a moment ago’). 
As Bradley says, this link can only exist between universals. 
But the whole must have already been apprehended as such 
by the subject. And this precisely is what could not occur 
ee 

Thus everything supports the impression that, at the begin- 
ning of the process is not the thing, but the object represented, 


19] 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


the object as linked to a psychical context. . . . A unity is formed 
and at the heart of it the object operates as an image in a con- 
sciousness. (Compare this to instances in which, under some 
particular influence, I re-become what I was—at least if to recall 
oneself is to re-become in an imperfect way.) 

Bradley is helping me more and more. As soon as we have 
grasped that we always have to deal with more than the terms 
and their relations, it becomes clear that there must be modes of 
concrete unity which are capable of making higher re-integrations 


possible. 


April 8th, 1919 

On prediction in the light of Osty’s book. The fundamental 
objection to prediction is that: “We can only see what zs, whereas 
the future zs not.’ But there is a paralogism here. We have no 
right whatever to say that what is not yet in being is not in being 
in any way. It may be contended that it is only possible to see what 
is actual, that the past as such is not capable of being an object 
of vision, and that memory is only a reconstruction. I feel more 
and more strongly convinced that this theory is false. I am con- 
vinced that the past as past can no more be dissociated from the 
past as present to the consciousness, than the object seen can be 
dissociated from the so-called real object. I see the object itself, 
I remember the past itself. This is only intelligible as regards 
the past because I am my past. Am I also my future? That question 
is very obscure. 

It is generally thought that the problem is resolved if we 
grant that the future is in some way pre-formed within the present 
and hence can be apprehended by senses (?) more subtle than ours. 
Is this intelligible? First of all we must eliminate the fictitious 
idea of the future that inheres in the present. The link in this 
instance can only be qualitative, like that of a melodic conca- 
tenation. I refuse to opt between the and—pure juxtaposition— 
and the z—implication or enfolding. All that is real (the develop- 
ment of a being, of a story, of an idea) lies outside this pseudo- 
dilemma. But one question remains outstanding: must not the 
future that is apprehended by the clairvoyant be a datum given, 
and does ‘given’ mean given to someone? These questions cause 
me uneasiness. Of necessity vision appears to be contingent in 


192 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


relation to a situation that it does not beget, a situation which is 
already in being (the meaning of this must be examined more 
thoroughly). But is the situation already in being for someone? 
Last December I was in too much of a hurry to resolve this 
capital problem. We are bound to treat the situation as already 
formed. Does that mean it is an object? Here again Bradley helps 
me by putting me on my guard against a serious confusion. 
I think, moreover, that when I spoke of a consciousness that is 
master of the future I meant to say that between such a con- 
sciousness and the future there can be no relation of subject to 
object. (It cannot possibly be maintained that creative activity is 
thinkable in the language of subject and object.) Thus the future 
is capable of being formed without being thought by anyone. 
But am I not allowing myself to be misled by incoherent meta- 
phors? I wrote that in last analysis all vision has reference to 
an order, to a world at whose centre being and thought coin- 
cide (as in creative imagination). I even used the word supra- 
consciousness to indicate the order that transcends the 
dualism of subject and object. Can we be more exact? I must 
admit I am still dissatisfied with this interpretation; it is too 
schematic. 

Inasmuch as I think myself as subject who is at once active 
and passive, and is affected from outside in manifold ways, it is 
plain that the situation S seen by the clairvoyant is bound to 
seem to me to be external, not to be given as datum, to be un- 
foreseeable. But as soon as I elevate myself to the idea of an im- 
manent link (which, by the way, is not thinkable in relational 
language) between me and others (or the universe), the situation 
ceases to be external, it is the development of an actual situation 
E which surpasses me so that by essence I am unable to become 
aware of it. Here is an example. The clairvoyant sees that I will 
meet a man with dark eyes on a square surrounded by trees. 
Clearly what is given to him as datum is the situation, the picture. 
But how does he manage to see in me a picture whose elements, 
at least some of them, are outside me? 


April 9th, 1919 
The broad answer is that on this plane it is meaningless to speak 
of elements being external to one another. A scene is an indivis- 


Le 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


ible whole and it is only by abstraction that we can cut up its 
terms or isolate its relationships. ‘But,’ comes the question, ‘in 
what way is this scene already pre-formed? Where is it pre- 
formed?’ To ask this is as meaningless as to ask where the next 
episode of the story is—the story I am in the process of telling. 
I know I am running the risk of coming up against the following 
dilemma, namely: either the episode in question is already an 
object, that is to say, it is explicitly thought, or else it is about 
to be improvised, which means that it is not yet in any way 
in being. I think we must reject this dilemma, and it is a point 
I did not perceive clearly when I spoke of ‘thought which fore- 
casts’ because the forecast is a schema and cannot be an object of 
vision. Pure improvisation is manifestly the unfolding or reve- 
lation of a whole (of a qualitative unity); it excludes external 
deposits that are strictly unforeseeable (unless in their turn they 
form the interior of a new and more ample unity). But the global 
unity of the story and the improvisation is not necessarily that 
of an object apprehended as such—there lies the point that I 
missed. (We find an illustration of what I mean in everyday ex- 
perience—e.g. when we start speaking under a sudden impulse 
and what we say is spontaneously put together in an organised 
way.) It was in this sense that I said that the unity of the future, 
of becoming, is fe/t or is a matter of feeling; and it is thus only that 
we can understand the maturing or incubation of the event to 
which I have alluded. 

Only here we are dealing with a story that can in no way be 
conceived as the contingent, ideal reproduction of a succession 
that is in other respects real. Becoming and relating, here, are 
one and the same thing.? 

This variant on the original hypothesis raises some serious 
difficulties. If the story is only ‘pre-formed’ as an indivisible 
and felt unity, are we to take it that it becomes detailed for the 
clairvoyant? How is the feeling in question transferred into 
vision? It would seem more natural to say that it only becomes 
explicit and is coined in successive scenes in the measure in which 
it is successively lived and unfolded for the subjects that it 
concerns. But this is not clear: how are we to conceive of it 


? There is nothing to justify our stating @ priori that all comes to maturity at once. 
That would raise new questions. 


194 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


being made explicit? If that process necessitates ‘contributions 
from outside’ the objection is decisive. But supposing it does not 
—in what does the ‘making explicit’ consist? 

There is a situation S which is about to arise, that is 
to say it is felt or fore-felt (i.e. it exists inasmuch as feeling 
or as fore-feeling). Obviously we cannot help asking: ‘For 
whom? With whom? Has that question any meaning? 
ie even if it has is it impossible in reason to avoid asking 
it? 

What we can say, I think, is this, that as I am able to look 
on the feeling as global and as sufficing for itself, there is no 
meaning in asking who experiences it. Whereas as soon as I begin 
looking on it as partial I attribute it to ‘someone’. It seems to 
me that here I have once again reached the distinction between the 
him and the non-him (the latter not necessarily being treated as an 
I or a thou). But is this feeling bound up with knowing? For the 
time being I am quite unable to see how this question can be 
answered. 

Another method came to my mind this afternoon. It is clear 
that two people reading the same book or the same notice, may 
have reached different places in the book or notice in question; 
that is a question of the position they occupy. It may be objected 
that the book or notice is not in time. But here we must distin- 
guish a series of possible durations (the duration of elaboration, 
of publishing, or printing, even the duration of the book in that 
it gets old and becomes worn out). The contents of the book, 
it may be argued, are non-temporal—but that is true of any 
historical content. Supposing it be maintained that, after all, the 
book survives after it has been read? But that might well not 
occur. One can conceive a system of signs developed exclusively 
in time, the equivalent of a discourse or a recitation. . . . Perhaps 
this hypothesis is fundamentally contradictory after all; | am 
not sure that the idea of distinct, individualised positions can 
yet be applied. 


July ist, 1919 

Yet again I have come up against the problem of the metaphysical 
possibility of second sight (the case of Mlle P.). All prophecy is 
vision bearing on a scene that has become present. In these 


19) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


conditions—they must be defined more exactly—the person who 
foresees becomes contemporary with another present, with a 
present which is not that of his body. This seems extremely 
obscure to us and even contradictory because we take it as axio- 
matic that at any given moment it is only possible to make one 
temporal cross-section in the world, an hour of the universe, 
and that the one and only Present is detailed into an infinity of 
individual Presents which are those of each consciousness—so 
that everything occurs as though there were a unique conscious- 
ness (though broken into infinite fragments) whose unfolding 
exactly synchronises with ours and even comprehends it within 
itself. Obviously if this supposition were imposed on us without 
redress second sight bearing on the future would have to be 
regarded as impossible. This idea first occurred to me at Zernetz 
in 1912 and now I have come back to it, though in a form that is 
perhaps clarified by my knowledge of Royce. Of course as soon 
as I take as my datum a world of consciousnesses, I have the 
right to ask: ‘What is happening at this moment?’ regarding 
every element in that world. But this I think only has a meaning 
if I consider that world as representing a world in space. I must 
clarify. Let us take a spatial world comprising a whole of elements, 
E, amongst which figures my body B. I am bound to suppose that 
corresponding to each state of my body there is in that case a 
homochronous and synchronised state for every element present 
in that world. At this very moment something definite must be 
‘happening’ on a certain farm near Perugia that I am evoking. 
What is happening there? That is an object of knowledge and 
there are no limits to the possibility of informing myself about it, 
if we allow for a certain lapse of time. Hence for every organic 
body, or more exactly, for every consciousness expressed by an 
organic body whose becoming is homochronous in relation to 
mine, the question guid nunc? is legitimate. But when I say it isa 
question, I am recognising that it can only be answered by signs 
or symbols. Whereas when I consider planes in consciousness 
that are set far away from the table of references constituted 
by the exterior world, the meaning of the problem becomes 
obscure. Are we still dealing with a matter of correspondences? 
It would be absurd to imagine planes for each consciousness 
which were docketed with the same index; or to ask what the 


196 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


consciousness E is experiencing on the plane P on which I am at 
this moment (and where I experience a certain emotion). The 
quid nunc is meaningless except in relation to a world in which 
we are active. Given that I know MLR. to be living, I can ask 
myself: What is he doing at this moment? But that is all. It may 
be claimed, and rightly, that my question is not only concerned 
with the position of his body. Nevertheless, it is only inasmuch 
~ as I prolong the lines of his action within himself that my question 
has a meaning. Outside these limits there is no question of 
representing or figuring, but only of becoming (Mitsein, sich 
hineinleben, etc.). Hence from the fact that transmission by signs 
or, more simply, knowing, can only be brought to bear on the 
present, or on the acquired which is the past as incorporated 
into the present, we are unable to draw conclusions about what 
surpasses all transmissions of this nature. From the fact that the 
future as such cannot be the object of a questionnaire, we 
have no right to infer that it cannot be seen, lived and pre- 
lived. (These observations are of the greatest importance for 
the ‘spiritist?’ problem—the problem of the consciousness of 


the dead.) 


July 2nd, 1919 

I resume with what I was saying yesterday. All questions asked 
of the future, all answers from the future, all transmissions of 
signs between the present and the future are inconceivable. Such 
questions and answers are only possible in one and the same 
present (we cannot be.informed save about what has been ac- 
quired or, as I would be tempted to say, about what belongs to 
the same layer of reality). But, as is clear, the situation of what we 
call the future in relation to the present is very difficult to define; 
and it is not absurd a priori to claim that what we call the future 
is on another level of reality. I would express this by saying 
that between successive moments there is a difference the nature 
of which has been far from exhausted when it is called an interval. 
I recognise that here I am on slippery ground, and that I am tend- 
ing to convert the successive into the simultaneous. But this, I 
think, is only in appearance. . . . Yet are we not obliged to admit 
that what is not yet in being for me may be already in being for 
someone else who is in some way in advance (metaphysically) 


197 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


of me? I think we are, but we must be careful about the meaning 
of the words J and he. 


July 4th, 1919 

Some new glimpses of light. To begin with it is plain that in 
immediacy, the pure ‘now’, a being does not realise the ‘fullness 
of what he is’-—I take as instance a feeling that is very deep. 
The more a being is, the less he is reduced to a simple succession 
of determinations (whether these are events or actions: moreover, 
the word ‘actions’ is most unsuitable, because to act in the 
successive sense is not to act genuinely. An action, as Bergson 
saw, concentrates a whole past and a whole duration within it). 
The deep feeling I am considering is not experienced in an instant 
like a physical pleasure or pain. I wonder whether I will not 
be led to conceive levels of time in reality and life that are 
distinct. 

(I note that the above links up with what I wrote several 
months ago on being—considered as that which holds out against 
the experience of criticism, since criticism dissolves away all 
that is not immediate.)* 


July 11th, 1919 

Glimpsed several important ideas on the same lines as those 
of Pére Laberthonniére. Perhaps we only have the knowledge we 
deserve. Perhaps it is what we are that is a measure of what we 
know, and not conversely. But of course this could only apply to 
metaphysical knowledge, not to knowledge that bears on simple 
abstract relations. 


July 13th, 1919 

Once again I have been asking myself the great question. Can I 
think myself as being perfectly informed about the universe and 
yet mistaken? This is at bottom Royce’s problem. Only there is 
another question that precedes this one. Is the universe such 
that I am able to be perfectly informed about it? Here we are 
concerned with the—even partial—unknowability of the universe. 
As long as I treat the universe as a simple object of possible 


* I wonder whether the pessimism of Proust is not exactly on a par with a philosophy 
of the pure immediate, with an inability to treat the mediate as real. 


198 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


enquiry, it will never provide me with absolute satisfaction. To 
be examined more closely. 


October 15th, 1919 


I have been re-reading with lively interest my notes of July 
ist and 4th. Yet they turn on a notion that I find very hard to 
define exactly. As I said then, I can ask myself: ‘What is X doing 
' at this moment? What is happening precisely now at P?’ And 
the identity of the plane of X and my plane, between P and the 
place at which I am at this moment, is precisely defined in function 
of the possibility I have of informing myself, inquiring or veri- 
fying. And, as is clear, even if I conceive of worlds that are 
placed at indefinitely growing distances from mine, but which 
lend themselves to my interrogation, what I have said applies 
to those worlds too. But a dialogue must be possible. Now there 


— 


is a dialogue as soon as there is perception. To perceive attentively | 


is precisely to be in a state of dialectical tension in relation to 
a given datum. But, as I have often pointed out, this only applies 
to what is capable of becoming material for information. Now 
it seems to me evident that there are manners of being which by 
their very essence do not lend themselves to this dialectical 
tension of the mind; and, this said, it seems to me that we have 
defined in the only valid way what is usually called the uncon- 
scious. I am always and at every moment more than the totality of 
predicates that an enquiry made by myself—or by someone else— 
about myself (cf. my notes of March 2nd, last) would be able 
to bring to light. 


When I review what I have written] am struck by a confusion 


at least on the surface. Somewhere I say: ‘What functions for | 
me as source of information is in this very measure a thou.’ We | 


must take care to notice that the shou appears when I put my em- 
phasis not on the idea of information, but on the idea of answer 
—which has the implication of community (us-ness). lexperienced 
this clearly, I remember, and made the distinction for myself, 
when I asked the way of someone I did not know. The two 
aspects that analysis dissociates (the tabulation—repertoire—and 
the Living being) are in reality indissolubly bound up; we must 
never forget this, or we will fall into abstraction and absurdity. 
I think, therefore, that we should inquire more deeply into the 


27) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


meaning of the idea of answer, which is closely bound up with 
the thou and alone can give that idea a content (here my notes of 
February 25th are useful). Yet in last analysis the thou is essen- 
tially that which I can invoke rather than that which I judge to 
be capable of answering me. Perhaps my soul would only be the 
ego of the psychologists, which is really only a Aim, were I not 
to converse about it with God, were it not involved and vitally 
interested in this conversation. Of course it can be objected 
that I am limiting myself to hypostatising simple grammatical 
categories. This point must be cleared up with the help of con- 
crete examples of warm feeling and deep interior life. If I am 
asked why my soul can only become itse/f when in relation to 
God, and when confronted with God, I cannot at present see any 
means of formulating an abstract answer which will satisfy me. 
But I can at least say this (though it needs elucidating and sifting): 
| My soul is always a thou for God; for God it is always confounded 
with the subject who invokes him. And this can only occur for 
a subject in the measure in which the subject, through love, 
imitates what must be called the divine attitude. The more this me 
is an object of study, something described, something whose 
development is retraced, the less it is a soul. Between the idea of 
soul and the idea of prayer, there is thus an intimate relation that 
cannot be set aside. What I still find very confusing is the proper 
relation I should establish between all this, which is of the 
metaphysical and religious order, and the psychological and 
,metapsychological theory that I sketched earlier. 
| Here there is something missing. I note simply that inasmuch 
| as I am a tabulation (repertoire) (that I treat myself as such) 
\I am only in the third person for myself. It is only through 
emotion that I become a zhou for myself. This involves an interest 
that in last analysis is love and so far as it concerns oneself is much 
rarer than is claimed by our terribly conventional psychology. 
(The whole problem of egotism needs further examination. Most 
of the time it is merely a way of behaving, a way of taking 
ourselves into account without loving ourselves.) 


October 16th, 1919 


I would like to take up once more a series of notions on which I 
worked earlier. That of intimacy is one of the most important 


200 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


(cf. my note on with of February 24th). It should be contrasted 
with the notion of familiarity. Is the relationship between famili- 
arity and intimacy analogous to the relationship that exists 
between Bergson’s two Reconnaissances? To be gone into. 

I must also reflect on the idea of trial or test. The great 
difficulty consists in grasping the real relationship between the 
trial or test and he who imposes the trial on me. When confronted 
with suffering the religious consciousness tends to see it as a 
trial. But what are we to understand by that? It seems to me 
that the idea of a trial can only have an acceptable meaning as 
functior of the thou. Thus we must exclude any idea of competi- 
tion and perhaps even any idea of selection. In reality selection 
bears on potentiality; it concerns knowing who is capable of 
accomplishing this or that given action. In this sense all selection 
can be said to be natural, whereas the trial bears essentially on 
that in us which is capable of passing beyond nature. It still 
remains to be seen whether this is purely verbal; are we not still 
dealing fundamentally with a potency or power, that is to say a 
nature? Close analysis is needed. Suppose I take the case of disil- 
lusionment or sorrow. Where is the element of risk in this? There 
is a threat of spiritual annihilation. But what exactly does that 
mean? The danger I think always lies in obsession, whatever be 
the aspect of that obsession. The soul runs the risk of having all 
its attention drawn to a particular object, or, should this object 
disappear (supposing that this has a meaning), of no longer being 
really attached to anything, even itself—of being lost and dis- 
solved. That is where the danger lies. The idea of temptation 
should be analysed in a similar way. 

I am sure that this is the right road. The idea of life as a 
trial. Faith is in essence something which ought to be tried and 
wants to be tried. Relation to the beyond. We must ask ourselves 
about the validity of a philosophy of trial and, on a deeper level, 
what we mean when we ask ourselves this question about validity. 
Here as elsewhere we set out from the fear of being taken in: 
‘Perhaps I am being a dupe.’ The experience of our fallibility 
is converted into a sort of active distrust. To see whether that is 
justifiable by right, I would proceed as I have done for atheism 
and ask what would be the meaning of saying: ‘It is false that life 
is a trial.’ I believe that essentially this negation is as much as 


201 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


to say: ‘It is inexact that there exists a being gifted with conscious- 
ness who has willed such a trial.’ But, unless 1 am mistaken, a 
judgment of this type, a judgment in the third person, does not 
bear on God but on a finite thought conceived by the imagination. 
Distinguish between an atheistic judgment (which is external 
to the religious order) and revolt (as in the case of Job) which 
is in some way bound up with the act of faith. Examine this very 
closely. 

To triumph in the trial is to maintain oneself as soul, to 
save one’s soul. To be examined more deeply. 

To begin with I think we must note that the statement “This 
is a trial’ is meaningless outside a definite spiritual context. It 
is not one of those statements whose value is independent of the 
person who utters them. This may at first sight be surprising. 
And we also need to grasp that we are not dealing here with a 
proposition giving information such as: “You are consumptive’ 
for instance, where the value of the proposition depends on the 
competence of the person who states it. It seems to me, though 
I am not yet able fully to justify what I am asserting, that only 
love can provide a real—I do not say a valid—content for an 
affirmation such as: “This is a trial.’ Between the person who talks 
to me in this way, and myself, there must be a condition of com- 
munity. We must be thou for one another. The other person 
must be unable to think as regards me: “This is a trial for him, 
it is his affair.’ He must partake in the trial. In this way we can 
perceive the link between the trial and charity. But the whole of 
this process may occur in my consciousness between me and 
myself, Inasmuch as I treat myself as an essence—as ‘someone’ 
who is a datum—I am him for myself and the idea of trial im- 
mediately loses all meaning; it is transformed in some kind of 
pseudo-biological way. As long as I have triadic relations with 
myself (and treat myself as an object) I remain on the plane of 
nature. This is particularly clear with regard to death. It is possible 
for me to think my death in a way which amounts to saying: 
‘He will die’; which, at bottom, is like saying. ‘The machine will 
stop’. In this case I am conversing on the subject of death with 
somebody else, whomsoever it be. If I reason in this way about my 
death or about the death of anybody else I am unable to lift 
myself to the thought of the beyond. From this standpoint all 


202 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


there can be is a more and more complete disorganisation of 
the machine’. And nothing else. The idea (?) of a trial is 
thus only applicable in the measure in which my unity with 
myself is recreated through feeling, through that intimate 
life of which dialectical self-consciousness is a more or less com- 
plete rupture. If I merely make the statement that ‘life is a test’ 
coldly, that, in my opinion, means I am thinking nothing what- 
~ever. We can see here the part that the priest may play. His 
mission is to awaken palpitating and indivisible life in us, and 
hence to restore its full significance to the idea of trial; but this 
is only possible in the measure in which I am a thou for him, 
when he, so to speak, is the incarnation of charity. 

To come back to what I was saying just now. A statement 
such as: “This suffering is a trial’ is not instructive, it does not 
inform us.! But if we continue this way will we not end up in 
a poverty-stricken subjectivism? Are we passing beyond the order 
of the ‘as if’? To consider life as a trial; to qualify our experience 
in a way that is personal to us: we are always confronted with 
the same dilemma—either objective fact or interior disposition. 
Every time I run into it I have the feeling of facing a mountain 
that must be moved. Yet Iam more than ever convinced that this 
‘dilemma’ misses the essence of religious life and of the deepest 
metaphysical thought. 

(Does not the problem at the deepest level consist in the effort 
to discover how objectivity regarding the purely individual is 
possible? In one aspect this is the problem that was brilliantly 
stated by Simmel in the last chapter of his Lebensanschauung; 
though he only stated it on the ethical plane. What causes infinite 
complications is the incurable tendency we have all had since Kant 
to think of the objective order in terms of legality or Gesezzmds- 
sigkeit. Now we cannot even dream of saying: ‘Each time some- 
one thinks his life in terms of the category of trial, this particular 
thing will happen’.) I am back here at the central theme of my 
reflections of 1913-1914, at the fundamental idea that the uni- 
versal is necessarily the relative; but now this idea is specified 
in an infinitely more concrete way. Notice that the question we 
are dealing with here is identical with the question that arises 


1 Let us add that it does not attribute a new predicate to a subject previously posited. 
This amounts to the same. 


203 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


regarding prayer whose universal efficacy can only be admitted 
if we treat prayer as a kind of procedure, in other words if we 
negate prayer. 

Perhaps we would not be deceiving ourselves if we said that a 
statement of the type that I am studying (the word statement is 
bad, but the term truth cannot be applied) needs to be dis- 
covered anew on each occasion. This is also very important. 
The virtue of this formula is bound up with the way in which it 
has been engendered and re-engendered by the soul, whereas 
the scientific formula, in its practical aspect, amounts to saying: 
‘If you do this particular thing I warn you that such and such 
will invariably happen. You have no need to ask me how I know 
it, nor to perform on your account the work that has enabled me 
to attain this certainty.’ Doubtless, even in the spiritual order, 
once the discovery has been made, it can be universalised, but 
this can only be thanks to my power of sympathy which enables 
me to imagine and live through the experience of my neighbour, 
of my brother, as though it were my own experience. We are 
never able to transfer a formula or recipe; perhaps all we can 
do is to awaken in someone else the life in which both of us 
participate. 

I realise that these observations do not take us far along our 
road. Some critics may say: “The value of the idea (?) of trial is 
purely psychological. I will endure a calamity far more easily 
if I suppose that it is a trial imposed on me by a higher will. 
It is a help.’ To this I answer that the word hypothesis does not 
fit here. ‘So be it,’ my critics will continue, ‘let us say that this 
way of qualifying your experience does modify it, but only from 
within; that we are dealing with a purely immanent development.’ 
But does not this take us back again to the standpoint of law, 
and amount to saying: “Given a being subject to these or those 
particular vicissitudes, he has interest in . . . it is a good means 
of . . . etc.’? Unconsciously we are placing ourselves on the 
biological level and regarding the use of the ‘category of trial’ 
as a condition favourable for self-preservation in the psycho- 
logical order. But this last idea is singularly obscure. Supposing, 
for instance, we accept as a trial an incurable malady. What 
happens to self-preservation in that case? We are reduced, I think, 
to conceiving in a vague way the maintenance of an equilibrium. 


204 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


And the crowd of mechanical associations and ideas which we 
immediately unleash will help to reinforce the psuedo-interpre- 
tation. But can such an equilibrium be maintained? To take a con- 
trary instance, let us imagine somebody who is incurable and who, 
with the knowledge that he is doomed, decides to make the best of 
the time he has left and to live in the most agreeable way possible. 
Scientific psychology may well comment that this second attitude 
is irreproachable and is even preferable to its opposite. The 
. religious consciousness denies this and declares that between 
the two there is no common measure. Psychologists will argue 
that this judgment of religious value is made in function of a 
particular personal disposition and hence is purely relative. But 
on this latter road there is no stopping. The psychologist as 
such is irresistibly led to posit the relativity of all judgments 
of value whatsoever. Moreover, analysis shows that this ‘pure 
psychology’ in question is an abstraction that cannot survive 
careful reflection. Are we obliged for that reason to revert to 
the opposite interpretation and to declare simply that the be- 
liever is right? That it is zrue that suffering is a trial that we must 
learn to accept with resignation? But the words ‘to be right’ can 
no longer be used here. Can I think the faith of someone else 
in any measure whatsoever if that faith is not mine? In this latter 
case we could only speak of an adhesion or attachment (however 
inexplicit). 


October 17th, 1919 

I need to go further into the idea of trial, making use of my 
notes of March 6th and 7th, 1919. I wrote that being is something 
that should be capable of being possessed. I will never admit 
that this is an ideal limit, as is maintained so it seems by a timid and 
confused school of neo-Kantian philosophers. I must emphasise 
again that no problem is harder to state than the problem of being. 
To speak of deing as a noun is to imagine some sort of hard core of 
resistance which survives beneath the perishable bark of the phe- 
nomenon. But, as Kant saw, in this way we transpose into the do- 
main of metaphysics, relations that are only thinkable as occurring 
between phenomena. (As regards the illusion of absolute interior- 
ity, cf. Hegel also.) It would be much more intelligible to say, in 
terms of a restricted but consequent rationalism, that the phenom- 


205 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


enon is being as incompletely thought, being as graspedin theleast 
concrete of its determinations. From this standpoint the problem 
of being amounts to the problem of how a complete system of 
categories is possible. I am not inquiring whether this way of 
thinking being is legitimate.1 I think that it can be shown that the 
problem is stated in a much more pointed and more concrete way 
to consciousness than this. Being, as I said before, is expectation 
fulfilled. There are moments at which life appears to us to be 
entirely empty. Nothing has any importance, nothing matters. 
Such experiences are the very negation of the feeling of fullness 
and profusion that we experience on other occasions. Our atten- 
tion cannot be fixed and interest is lacking. This danger we run 
when we live in a world to which we have become too accus- 
tomed, a world that answers us mechanically. The same occurs 
when misfortune lays bare and empties the soul. We have always 
with us the contrast of the full and the empty which is to me 
fundamental, and which, speaking generally, has so far only 
been considered in its physical aspects. Our activity needs to be 
exercised to the full in a world of fullness. The experiences in 
function of which the problem of being can be posited in an 
intelligible way are happiness, love and inspiration. But the 
problem concerns being and not some being. It may here be argued 
that I have reduced the problem of being to the problem of en- 
joyment. And indeed I am firmly convinced that there is being 
as soon as there is enjoyment; but it is at this point that the trial 
—the critical experience—intervenes. But what if it is said that 
enjoyment as such (and here and now) is absolute, that the judg- 
ment that we bring to bear on it after the event is, so to speak, 
weakened in advance? What of the idea of a fundamental rhythm 
of activity that we should be able to accept? Of the view that the 
wise man is the man who is aware of the ineluctable limits of all 
enjoyment and reproaches us when we claim to pass beyond 
them? Indeed it is easy to see all the objections that a kind of 
philosophy can make against retrospective asceticism, against 
repentance. And we must not reject all of them in our argument. 
But in spite of that we can nevertheless answer, I think, that 
many enjoyments do not satisfy the whole of our being, that is 


? I think we can establish that if we follow this road thought cannot pass beyond the 
formal, the potential, and hence falls short of its programme. 


206 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


to say our spiritual nature. They only satisfy us on condition 
that we have already put a great part of ourselves to sleep. And 
that part is much the strongest. But here we are in danger of 
running into a difficult question. By what right can we affirm that 
the whole of ourselves can ever be satisfied, that harmony between 
the different kinds of satisfaction is possible? Can we be sure that 
we are not bound to make certain sacrifices? What can guarantee 
the possibility of accord? I note in passing that anyone who an- 
swered in this way would doubtless refuse to establish a hier- 
archy between the different modes of satisfaction that he judges 
to be non-unifiable. As for myself I think the problem is insoluble 
as long as we state it in terms of the third person of abstract 
analysis. But as soon as it is stated in a living way, that is, for me 
or for thee, the situation appears in a new light. I am fully aware 
of the objection that this answer is no more than a mere expedient. 
I myself cannot help becoming anxious about the mechanical 
character of the solution. I must therefore resume the examination 
in much greater detail. 

If in cold blood I divide myself up into ‘parts’ I am bound 
to admit that I do not know whether or not these ‘parts’ can be 
satisfied when they are taken together. These parts are ‘they’, 
they are in the third person, they are not me. 


October 18th, 1919 


1 am experiencing some difficulty in pursuing this analysis to-day. 
It seems to me that everything depends on the spiritual level 
on which the problem is not stated but lived. This point seems 
to me crucial though it is difficult to think if in a precise way, 
which is explainable, since to think is almost inevitably to convert 
the thou into an abstract him or it. If we can get beyond this 
stage, I suppose it is thanks to a sort of intellectual imagination 
whose nature needs examining—a kind of imagination I must 
be careful not to call intuition. I note in passing that the problem 
of freedom, the real problem (I am not speaking of the scholastic 
problem of freedom) can itself only be stated—as Bergson has 
brilliantly pointed out—on a certain spiritual level, probably the 
same spiritual level. It can of course be objected that the state of 
interior division is not necessarily a superficial state. Yet I think 
that consent to remain divided is only possible on a certain plane. 


207 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


All real passion makes us wish to be whole. (This also applies to 
relations between distinct beings; division is only acceptable for 
those who do not genuinely love.) But at present I do not want 
to probe into what this means. Such a formula is certainly not 
clear. It is one of those formulae that only mean something on the 
plane of dialectics. We conceive, we posit the ego as coveted by 
something other than itself, by another Aim but in that way we 
put ourselves outside the real conditions of interior life. 


October 19th, 1919 


I revert to the beginning of the preceding discussion. Under 
what conditions can we legitimately affirm that reality is capable 
of providing us with absolute satisfactions? I think that at the 
outset we need to posit the principle that these satisfactions 
cannot be objects for scientific knowledge or technics. Whatever 
be asserted by shallow modern ‘naturalists’ (with their meta- 
physics for vegetarians) there is no technique for achieving 
happiness. Or, to be more exact, inasmuch as such a technique is 
possible, it only. applies to ‘anybody’ and hence to ‘nobody’. 
At this point I suppose we must be ready for the answer: ‘It is 
because it is imperfect that this technique is incapable of being 
specifically defined. By rights, if we really knew who you were, 
we would know what you need.’ But is it conceivable, even in 
right, that someone else could ever know who I am well enough 
to determine what I am in need of? I am Azm for the technician; 
I am in the third person. I am an object, he puts me into a general 
category, whatever be the specifications that his experience or 
his diagnosis enables him to attribute to the image he has of me 
which, in its initial stage, is entirely abstract. But what is it within 
me that rises up against the pretence of deciding what I need, 
against such ‘moral prescriptions’? Am I merely experiencing an 
irrational explosion of individualism? Why does it seem to me 
that my life loses its value if its content is thus provided from 
outside? Above all why is the case different when we are dealing 
with a being I love and who loves me? Is it that the beloved is no 
longer external? For it goes without saying that the intervention 
of the beloved must not take the form of an order or be con- 
descending. 

Why am I enveloped in deep sadness when I consider myself 


208 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


so as to define myself, so as to recognise the particular sphere that 
appears to be chosen for myfactivity? Even the idea that my 
nature prohibits me from experiencing some particular manner of 
understanding or of feeling is unacceptable to me. I grapple with 
my nature and loathe it. Is this merely pride? It would be very 
superficial to say that. The whole margin of limits that I decide 
to exclude from the Aim with whom I identify myself seems to 
rise up and affirm that it is mine. 

Absolute satisfactions seem therefore incapable of coming to 
me, unless it be from a being for whom I am thou, a being who 
turns his efficacious solicitude towards me in an active way. 
This I take to be certain, but it is still insufficient. The idea 
of the act of kindness is certainly not a clear idea and here that 
expression must not be given a realist meaning. The idea of 
advantages that are sometimes bestowed plentifully on one parti- 
cular head, and at other times are measured out with parsimony, 
is an idea that is metaphysically void, as is the idea of any kind of 
objective valuation or comparison, and for the same reason. Yet 
I must admit that I cannot see clearly here. Is it enough to dis- 
tinguish between advantages considered in their material aspect 
(wealth, honours, etc.) and the internal disposition with which I 
consider them and even the use I make of them? 


October 20th, 1919 


Even if we admit that this distinction is valid in itself, we need 
to elucidate its meaning; and that is not easy because this dis- 
position is likewise a gift. I do not think that it can reasonably 
be said that it depends on me that I welcome my destiny in 
this or that given way. At least this raises a problem that is 
obscure. The more deeply we examine current notions the more 
we discover the confusions they conceal in greater or less degree. 
The idea of satisfaction is of the number. Can it be identified 
with the idea of satiation? Not exactly, I do not think that, con- 
sidered in itself, the idea of satisfaction entails the idea of ‘full 
measure’. The higher we rise on the spiritual ladder, the less this 
idea seems to us one of receiving our portion.’ Every moral system 


1 But I am not sure that ethics are not essentially bound up with a particular representation 
of rights—that is to say of portions—and of the duties that these rights entail as counter- 
part. In this sense the religious categories infinitely transcend the moral categories (1925). 


H 209 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


that is based on the idea of sharing (egalitarianism) is unques- 
tionably vicious even in its very principle. What matters is what 
is whole in us. And in the first place it is of course of love that I 
think. My portion; his or her portion—this notion ceases to 
have any meaning when we are dealing with a thou. In the light 
of this idea, seen in its negative facet, perhaps what I have said 
above becomes clearer. I cannot conceive God in function of my 
portion considered as such. When I thank him for the lot he has 
bestowed on me, I posit myself as a being that excludes other 
beings, a being who is not busied with knowing the lot of others. 
And this is the more true the more we take into consideration the 
external goods that are an object of competition: power, fortune 
and, if not intelligence, at least the benefits that can be derived 
from it. Hence we can see fairly clearly the sense in which man is 
involved in gratitude to God. Beyond certain limits this gratitude 
changes into idolatry. Actually my gratitude should be less for 
what I have than for what I am. And of course the more God is 
for me, the more I am; in that way we can see the intimate relation 
that unites us. My gratitude could only be for the gift that God 
has made me of himself, and it seems to me that if an advantage 
can ever be considered as a gift, it is inasmuch as it comes to be 
regarded as a disguised form of the gift that God makes to me of 
himself. This is an indivisible gift that has nothing exclusive about 
it, and has nothing in common with the attribution of a portion. 
Health, for instance, or perceptiveness can be envisaged in that 
way. As regards society, the consequences of this are far from clear 
to me; we should distrust translations of the idea into the practical 
order when they are too direct: more often than not they de- 
pend on misunderstandings. But I can see fairly clearly the 
intimate bond between interior riches and the need of others 
(Zarathustra). 


October 21st, 1919 


To revert to the idea I expressed so badly yesterday. There 
is no doubt that we need to react strongly against the classical 
idea of the eminent value of autapx ta or personal self-sufficiency. 
The perfect is not perfect because it suffices for itself; or at 
least the perfection of self-sufficiency is that of a system, not that 
of an individual. Yet we can never be satisfied with the idea of 


210 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


a being whose truth is external to himself. Here there is a subtle 
nuance that is rather difficult to establish. Under what conditions 
does the relationship binding a being to what he needs involve 
a spiritual value? It seems as though here there must be response, 
reciprocity, awakening. The relationship that can be said to be 
spiritual is that of being with being; and this is enough to refute 
and show up the metaphysical nothingness of one form of pan- 
theism. 

But seen from this standpoint does not the Kantian idea of 
the end-in-itself seem artificial and merely juridical? What really 
matters is spiritual commerce between beings, and that involves 
not respect but love. 


October 22nd, 1919 


I am fully aware that I have always judged a being to be worthy 
of respect by reason of the love that he has inspired (or of which 
he has been unjustly deprived). Deep down Kantian rationalism 
is becoming increasingly foreign to me. A being does not interest 
me inasmuch as he is an embodiment of reason; as such, after all, 
he is only a he. Beyond question Kant over-exaggerated the value 
of autonomy as the source of values. Of course, as I am fully 
aware, he concerned himself primarily with discovering that 
which is capable of being universalised, and he thought that a 
morality based on feelings is untenable because it rests on a 
contingent datum, on something which is capable of not being 
(or which cannot be ‘required’ in right). To adopt the language 
I previously made use of I would say that he took a technical 
point of view. What are the conditions under which someone 
(no matter who) can act or will in an ethical way? The answer 
must be universal, that is to say, valid even for the least favourable 
case. The important question here is whether, if we proceed in 
this way, we are not in. the strict sense cutting ourselves off 
from the conditions of spiritual life. Fundamentally intention 
is certainly not as easily grasped as Kant thought (the word 
‘easily’ may seem surprising; Kant certainly worked care- 
fully on the idea of intention and eliminated the contingent 
element of feeling; yet did he not make use of sleight of 


hand?). 


At this moment I am wondering whether two beings, who are 
211 


} 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL. 


) habitually chow for one another, do not tend to be converted each 
for the other into a Aim if they are in the presence of a third 
person who is a show for both of them. At first sight this 
sounds like sheer balderdash. But in reality it is concrete 
and important. Yet I do not want to say that there is anything 
inevitable in this, for to do so would doubtless be meaning- 
less. 

A difficult question that must be tackled concerns the con- 
ditions under which we can think the thou without it becoming 
a him. What seems to happen in practice is that I begin by think- 
ing the zhow as a Aim and then rectify this by a subsequent act. 
But it is not yet very clear. 

I need to recapitulate in a simple way the steps by which I 
have reached this idea (by means of the notion of answer and the 
notion of that). Probably I should also inquire whether to think 
invariably means to reflect. The answer is certainly that it does 
not—and love should be able to be thought without being dis- 
pelled in an inert relation. 


November 25th, 1919 


Once again I continue with my diary after a month’s interruption. 
... But, no; Iam not sure that what I wrote about Kantianism is 
false. After all Kant gives us a sort of recipe for extracting the 
best we can from a nature that is badly provided—even as regards 
morals. If morality is to be possible, this technique must exist. 
Now morality exists, therefore, etc. . . . But does morality 
really exist? The question is justified. It does exist in the measure 
in which I affirm that it does, in the measure in which I have 
faith in its reality. Possibly—yes, I think I would go so far 
as to say this—it would be enough for a consciousness to deny 
morality resolutely and radically, for us to be unable to say 
that it zs without a reservation which would be fundamentally 
destructive. The dialectician can have recourse to trying to 
establish that I affirm morality by the very act by which I believe 
I am denying it. This has been the classical method since Plato 
and it is certainly impressive; but is it really convincing?— 
that a system of fundamentally ethical statements is involved in 
any proposition bearing on moral reality—and even involved in 
any proposition that purported to deny the statement: ‘It is 


212 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


perhaps true, but is it decisive?’ I am aware that this question is in 
danger of seeming impudent and even absurd. And yet! Is it not 
possible to want to contradict it? “Not as such’, I may be answered. 
‘From the moment I want A and B at the same time I state, 
however confusedly, that there is a connection between A and B 
within a simple unity.’ Granted. But may not that unity only be 
_ a simple external conjunction, a pure and? Though every effort 
may be made to show me the real incompatibility of A and B, 
could I not still have recourse to refusing to see this? I may be 
told that if I do so I am refusing to think. Yes, but supposing 
L agree not to think? Supposing I opt for a world which is not 
that of thought? True, there is the recourse of denying what I 
affirmed a moment ago, and maintaining that morality exists, 
even if I insist on denying it. But such morality would be no 
more than an abstract order, it would resemble a truth abstractly 
dissociated from the act that posits it. Now what is the meaning 
of speaking of a truth that I do not know, that is not for me? 
Does this mean that I have not been in the situation needed for 
observing or recognising it? This occurs even in the simplest 
cases. Yesterday, for the first time, I read the name of a Russian 
town which is called Slaviansk. This town has always existed, 
but I was not in a position to know it. There we have a synthesis 
that I had neither the opportunity nor the means of forming. 
Can the same be said regarding moral truth which is considered 
to exist though I deny it? If I could claim this I would absolve 
myself. I would be no more guilty of being ignorant of such 
moral truth than of being ignorant of the existence of Slaviansk 
until yesterday. Moreover, in such a case I cannot be said to be 
really denying this truth. Because I can only deny what I know. 
Thus we are obliged to suppose that though I may believe I am 
denying this moral truth, I am really denying something other 
than it. I am sinning through ignorance. It seems to me that even 
in the Kantian type of ethical system there is an enormous and 
concealed intellectualist element.! There is still the further resource 
of declaring that fundamentally I am not sincere, that something 
within me recognises the moral truth that I verbally deny. I can 
deny verbally that two and two make four, I can say that two 


1 Yet I must recognise that this does not prevent Kant’s formula: No one ever does evil 
willingly, fcom being radically false. 


213 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


and two make five. But that is mere words and empty breath. 
The same, it can be said, applies to the deliberate denial of moral 
truth. Only in the latter case we must go still further. If this 
theory is true the immoral act itself is only a meaningless gesture. 
But in that case it is no longer immoral. According to the other 
hypothesis it is a lie; but if we admit that hypothesis the whole 
problem comes up anew. For either the lie is not conscious, and 
we fall back on the first hypothesis; or else it is conscious, and 
then it is a pure immoral act in the sense in which I defined it 
earlier. The first alternative may seem more satisfying, and it 
amounts to denying radically that immorality can exist as such. 
If what we customarily call sin is in reality of the same order as 
the blow I strike when I am asleep, it is plain that any action, 
in the strongest sense of the word, is always a moral act. Only 
we then have the problem of whether, in that case, morality 
itself does not entirely disappear. For to judge morally is essen- 
tially to forbid, it is to treat the immoral act as possible and to 
exclude it. Hence all outlets seem closed. For to deny when we 
know what we are denying means in reality to reject. Morality 
then ceases to be a system of valid statements and becomes a 
mode of life that I may or may not accept. Whereas if I am ig- 
norant of what I am denying, my fault dissolves as fault, it is 
merely error. Supposing it be contended that at least the formula 
of the law is known to me? Agreed; but why should this formula 
oblige me to respect it? For we are outside the realm of ethics 
and in that of arbitrary ritualism. Thus I tend to believe that the 
first alternative should be accepted: namely that there is no 
technique for morals, there is no infallible way of inciting me 
to will the good. Doubtless, to some extent, Kant would have 
agreed with this. But for all that he does posit as a truth by right 
universal that I ought to act in a manner that is in conformity 
with the categorical imperative, and that as I ought to do so I 
am able to do so; the transition from the thou shalt to the thou 
canst is indeed the nerve of the whole Kantian system of ethics. 
But who affirms to me that this is so? For Kant it is evidently 
myself, inasmuch as I participate in reason. It is an absolute fact, 
something which is bound up with my quality of rational 
being. Kant guarantees to me not only this is so, but 
also that if I am of good faith I will myself discover that it is 


214 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


so. My essential quarrel is with the legitimacy of that claim. 


November 26th, 1919 


It goes without saying that the question—it is nowadays far 
too often discussed—as to whether or not the affirmations of the 
moral consciousness derive their content from social reality, has 
from my standpoint, no interest. Society, too, is something which 
needs to be willed. Moreover, so as to make moral reality coincide 
with social life, we are led to modify the characteristics of the 
latter by a series of logical expedients whose details are of no 
importance here. 

A much more interesting point is the question of whether 
or not morality forms an indivisible whole in the idealist sense. 
Whether, when I commit a particular immoral act, I really deny 
morality as a whole. All that we can say about this, I think, is 
that inasmuch as I act in an immoral way, I exclude myself from 
a certain life, I refuse to participate in it. And in that way I make 
my future participation in it more difficult, because my act con- 
tributes to determining me myself. 

Here we must foresee at least one question. I have spoken of 
that life from which I exclude myself by my act. But is this realised 
in practice, in act? The problem is serious because, unless I am 
mistaken, there can be no question of a formal totality of rules 
that are in the strict sense valid; or, rather, these rules are offered 
to me, presented to me. When I reject them I deny that they have 
the character of rules, and say ‘Let there be rules for others but 
not for me.’ But in that way do we not convert them into ‘manners 
of living’ that are purely contingent? Or more exactly are we not 
admitting that for the agent himself these ‘rules’ are nothing 
more than that? But this agent cannot be judged guilty unless in. 
our estimate of his act we adopt the very criterion that he himself 
refuses to accept, that is to say unless we attribute to these rules 
the value of universal law. One man calls guilt that which for 
another is only non-conformity. Who is to disentangle them? 
And here the previous argument comes in, with all its weight; 
I must entertain no hope of demonstrating to the agent in question 
that it is 1 who am right, and that he is really guilty. But what 
follows? We have reached a point that could be called pure 
ethical monadism. The ‘guilty’ man and myself are shut up in 


215 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


the enclosures of our different ways of estimating. As soon as I 
admit that the ‘guilty’ man denies with knowledge of what he is 
saying, I prohibit myself from speaking of moral truth. It is not 
a question of something that I know and that he does not know. 
I have no more elements at my disposal than he has, I am in no 
better condition than he is..To say that I am favoured by my 
nature would again amount to denying morality as such. So what 
follows? 

When I act in conformity with certain norms, I believe that 
my action has a value. Yet this formula is not enough to set us oa 
our way to a really positive solution. I accept what he refuses. 
I accept what he rejects. That is all we can say so far, and it must 
be admitted that it is not very informative. I do not only accept, 
I affirm that I have reason to accept. If I limited myself to 
accepting, it would be said that we have each our different ways 
of seeing, of feeling or of being. But I say that I am right. And 
this is not clear because I have not, at least in right, a valid 
motive for affirming that the ‘guilty’ man can be put into a con- 
dition of self-contradiction and thus can be obliged to withdraw. 
But then what? The problem does not consist in changing the 
conditions in which he is placed, but in transferring his demg 
itself, in converting him. It may be objected that this distinction 
between the conditions in which he is placed and his total being 
is arbitrary and, above all, that as soon as I begin considering the 
individual being I fall back into the field of pure empiricism: I 
am in a given way, he is otherwise than me. What is the meaning 
of my saying that I am right? This objection is important in. 
that it brings to light the danger that lies in this way of expressing 
oneself. Yet it is only a question of terminology. May I not lay 
claim to a certain type of superiority in relation to the other man 
whom I persist in declaring guilty? Meanwhile is the other man 
able to place himself in my situation? It must be repeated that I 
am not really better placed than he, that I possess no lights 
refused to him. Nevertheless, the question still seems to me very 
obscure. For if to say ‘he is guilty’ really means ‘he is taking the 
wrong path and is mistaken whereas I am on the right path,’ 
then we are involving ourselves in phariseeism and are a thousand 
leagues from genuine moral life—and in addition we are entangled 
in a labyrinth of contradictions. To claim on the other hand that to 


216 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


say ‘he is guilty’ is to posit between him and me a difference in 
being, is really very equivocal; can I proclaim that he is out- 


oy life in which I participate without thereby absolving 
im: 


November 27th, 1919 


I return to what I was at great pains to express yesterday. First 
of all it must, of course, be admitted that what I am concerned 
with here is only the attitude of the man who wholly refuses to 
recognise moral values as such. If my argument is exact, to say 
of that man that ‘he is guilty’ is to recognise that he nevertheless 
in some way participates in the life from which I declare him to be 
excluded. But how is that possible? It does not mean, of course, 
that he affirms what he believes he is denying, but that meta- 
physically he is all the same a member of the society from which 
he excludes himself. I am fully aware that he will have little 
inclination to subscribe to this interpretation, and will absolve 
himself from doing so, either by saying that in fact a case re- 
sembling the one in question does not arise, or else, that if it does, 
all we need to see in it is an anomaly of a pathological type. I 
will consider these two ways in turn. 

To begin with, can it be stated as a fact that there is no one 
who deliberately excludes himself from what we commonly call 
morality? I maintain that any such statement is inexact, and in 
any case that it is possible. I will go further. There is reason to 
think that in all of us there is to be found at least a little of that 
kind of immoralism. Moreover, it would be easy to show that to 
introduce here the idea of health or of norm is either to fall 
back into intellectualism, or else to treat morality simply as a 
contingent ‘manner of being.’ 

I am thus bound to think the guilty man in one respect 
as belonging to a world from which in another respect he is 
excluded. And to say that this dualism has a metaphysical 
character is to affirm the absolute irreducibility of these two 
aspects or of these two natures; the impossibility of bringing 
them to unity by a reasoning of the platonic type; and the neces- 
sity of conversion—that is to say of a strictly supernatural action 
that can alone achieve their unification. 

Moreover, for the sake of clarity it would doubtless be best 


* 


H 217 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


not to make use of the word ‘guilty’ here, but to reserve it for 
cases where there is responsibility in the strictest sense, that is, 
for cases of an infraction of a known and recognised law. Nor can 
it be said that by refusing to speak of guilt I have placed myself 
once more on the plane that I claimed I had passed beyond. The 
only difference in this is that the condemnation is directed against 
a mode of life rather than against the agent himself. 

I may be asked yet a further question. By what right do I 
posit a condition in the supra-empirical or metaphysical order 
where there is no difference in the empirical conditions? ‘In 
reality,’ it can be said, ‘you are looking for a means of justifying 
the over-bold step by which you, judging from your point of 
view, condemn someone who places himself on grounds other than 
yours. The difficulty arises from the fact that you refused to admit 
that your point of view and that of the agent we are discussing 
are absolutely different. But in this way you may be creating 
artificial and insurmountable obstacles for yourself. I who have 
accepted the fundamental conditions of all social life claim the 
right to judge the man who withdraws himself from them.’ But 
this is very questionable; for what do we mean by judging some- 
body? A judgment by its very essence should be recognised as 
just by the man who is judged. And that is precisely what is im- 
possible in this case. | 

And if I be told that one can judge a being without preoccupy- 
ing oneself about his eventual reactions, just as we verify an 
operation of logic? But can a human being be compared to a 
logical complexity? 


November 29th, 1919 


Yet I think the argument can still be maintained: “The erring 
person whom you are discussing is, for reasons which vary in 
each particular case, in no condition to recognise the order whose 
reality you for your own part affirm. Nothing justifies your 
seeing in his incapacity anything save an infirmity, a sort of blind- 
ness. Are there not intellectual forms of blindness (in mathe- 
matics, for instance)?’ Thus stated the objection is not lacking in 
force. But I do not think it is decisive, because there is nothing 
positive about the fact of being unable to understand a demon- 
stration. It is only a limitation—and should we not add that the 


218 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


man who does not understand at least knows that he does not 
understand. But it is not enough to say that if this difference 
which is judged to be fundamental bears on conditions that we 
have no power to modify; we are still led to posit an election, 
a choice, though this is a natural choice which destroys the very 
notion of morality. Strictly speaking, that too can be contested. 
Aesthetic enjoyment also depends on natural conditions. Is that 
a reason for denying that there are aesthetic values? May there 
not be moral values in an analogous way, although the empirical 
recognition of those values is bound up with the contingent 
achievement of a particular state of fact? But this formula is only 
clear in appearance. Who affirms that these values ‘exist’? It is 
the man who acknowledges them. He goes so far as to denounce 
a priori as null and void the affirmations of the ‘unhealthy’ people 
who do not recognise them. 

This conception resembles an infinitely degraded Platonism, 
a Platonism in which no discussion can take place between 
the opposite parties. The affirmation of the moralist amounts to 
saying: “They must undergo treatment’ (supposing treatment can 
be attempted). The idea of ‘operation’ tends to substitute itself 
for that of conversion or persuasion. And now we need to dis- 
cover the conditions under which an operation is possible or 
conceivable. . . . 


December ist, 1919 


A treatment or operation aims at permitting an apparatus to 
function ‘freely’ ‘normally,’ etc. But can ‘normal’ life be compared 
to the functioning of an apparatus? What makes me uneasy here 
is the example of aesthetics. . . . 

As a result of reading my notes to P. I am reverting to the 
thou to define still more precisely this important and difficult 
notion. The thou is not only the person interrogated as such, 
it is that which is questioned inasmuch as this is not itself treated 
as the object of an interrogation. I approach someone with 
the intention of asking him a question, but at the same time I ask 
myself whether he will be able to answer, whether he has the 
wherewithal for informing me. He is not thou for me, but he, a 
collection or accumulation of data. Even on the most elementary 
plane the thow is only capable of being defined in function of 


219 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


faith, of the spontaneous refusal to ask questions. Only when 
I am dealing with a person who is given to me empirically, I 
cannot prevent myself from thinking objectively, that is to say 
doubting. I will be told that my doubt bears on the predicates, 
- not on the existence of the subject himself. But here it is possible 
to bring in the old Hegelian argument according to which it is 
only the predicates that matter. What assumes tragic importance 
in the history of our relations with others is not existential doubt, 
but doubt as regards being, or more exactly doubt as regards 
‘value’. We may wonder whether this doubt is doubt of the pre- 
dicates. We only need to reflect on the deep meaning of one 
simple question: ‘Is he worthy of my love for him?’ to feel with 
unbelievable intensity the insufficiency of our categories. On 
what does the question really bear? 

At this point we must ask ourselves once more about the 
sense in which I have predicates. Of course I am able to give a 
description of myself—but, leaving aside the difficulty of under- 
standing how this description is metaphysically possible, ought 
we not to say that my deepest reality extends infinitely beyond 
any such description? Here there is a whole group of questions 
that are so tangled that I cannot really see how to disentangle 
them. I can attribute to myself a series of predicates as though 
somebody else were attributing them to me; in this measure 1 am 
‘somebody else’ for myself; I speak of myself as I would speak 
of anybody else. But all that is deepest in me falls outside this 
mode of thinking. Freedom, for example, is only conceivable 
in the measure in which I have in me the means whereby I can 
transcend the order of the Aim. I am unable to set down my 
intuition in detail in a discursive way, though I am sure I shall 
succeed in the end—but I feel strongly that to will is to cease 
to treat oneself as him. My notes of March 1919 must be inter- 
preted in this way. Not to will is to say: ‘I shall not be able to, 
given what I am it cannot happen that . . . ’ In that instance I 
am treating myself as a third party, I am speaking about myself 
as a third party. But to will is to cancel oneself out as Aim, and 
to rediscover the fertile indivision that was abolished by dialectics. 
So it is a serious error to see an interior tension in the will, and 
on this point nothing is more deceptive than the dramas of 
Corneille. I maintain on the contrary that to will is not to stiffen 


220 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


oneself but to relax. In a word the person who fails to will hypno- 
tises himself with a calculation of possibilities, and it is here that 
the duts intervene: on the one hand there is what I might call my 
desire, my preferences, etc., on the other there are particular 
obstacles and difficulties. Either literally I get lost in this cal- 
culation, that is to say I set myself aside; or else I treat myself 
as a datum amongst other data, and to will is precisely to refuse 
to treat oneself in that way. In this sense the comparison with 
faith is essentially correct, for to believe is to refuse to throw 
into the balance. At the root of faith there is the will not to com- 
pare. In this way I come back to my difficult and abstract argu- 
ments of long ago, but it seems to me that I now have the equip- 
ment for stating them more solidly. “Within me,” I said at one 
time, “there is the wherewithal to transcend all true judgment 
brought to bear on myself.” What exactly did I mean by that? 
That all judgment brought to bear on me is brought to bear on a 
third person who, by definition, cannot be one and the same as 
myself. The man for whom I am a thou goes infinitely beyond 
these judgments even if he accepts them. When he loves me 
he as it were opens a credit account for me. Royce has probed 
deeply into the fact that love individualises. But does the prin- 
ciple of individualisation, as he believed, reside in the unique end 
that this given being alone is in the position to realise? Note 
that this end is not capable of being grasped either by the man who 
is thought to realise it, nor by other empirical subjects. Must 
we say that God alone can grasp it? That would be recognising, 
it seems to me, that the person in question is a him and not a thou 
for God. In any case it would not account for what is distinc- 
tive in proper human love and the human bond. At this point I 
am persuaded of the need to appeal to an order of ideas or of 
experiences that infinitely surpass the teleological plane, and this 
research is the more difficult in that it would be vain to appeal to 
the idea of a quality proper to one individual, that only a given 
other individual would be able to discern. To love is not ‘to 
know adequately.’ It may be that love dispenses a privileged 
knowledge, but it precedes it as it also precedes evaluation. I 
perceive yet another point, which is that love is bound up with 
the emergence of the ‘7’ which, far from positing itself as essence, 
springs forth as lover. Love rises up like an invocation, like an 


221 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


appeal of the J to the J, and what I said formerly of the opposition 
between invocation and indication applies here perfectly. But we 
must take care. From the fact that the invocation is not addressed 
to what I have called the ego-source of information, are we to 
conclude that it is addressed to a me destitute of predicates? 
I do not love him because of what he is, I love what he is because 
he is he, I thus boldly anticipate all experience; I anticipate all the 
predicates in which experience will be deposited. True, it may be 
contended that at the origin of this anticipation there must already 
be the recognition of a predicate, but I think that that is false. 
There is an act, a state, a manner of being, as you will, which 
the descriptive consciousness compares with the recognition of 
a predicate, but in reality it is an unforeseen enrichment of my 


being. 


December 2nd, 19 1 9 


There is love only where there is absolute renewal and even 
rebirth. Love is life which decentralises itself, which changes its 
centre. But this raises a formidable metaphysical problem. From 
the fact that love does not bear on an object, on a third person, 
am I to conclude that it directly attains what I might call the 
non-him in the other? Common sense says that I must not. 
Common sense does not admit that the person I love can be 
effectively reached by my love, unless my love be communicated 
(by signs). Even in that case it is not my love that attains him. 
But it is not at all certain that common sense is right. And here 
we have the whole subjectivist conception of love whose prin- 
ciples need to be revised. We commonly reason as follows: 
“The being that you love is different from the real being, hence 
your love does not bear on being itself, there is nothing onto- 
logical in it. But all that we have the right to say is that on love, 
which is never a judgment, we build an intellectual construction 
which may be entirely false. But this only puts off the difficulty. 
It will be agreed that the transvaluation which is at the basis of 
love corresponds to a real transformation of the lover, but has 
this necessarily for correlative a modification of the ‘beloved 
object’? I must note immediately that in a system of triads the 
question is probably meaningless; I posit myself as external to 
the lover and the beloved; I consider their relation from outside. 


222 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


They appear to me as radically separated; but is not this due 
to the fact that I can only really think this love if I participate 
in it? It is not for me unless it becomes in some way my love. 
This is tantamount to saying that the question asked only really 
has a meaning from the standpoint of the lover himself. ‘Does 
my love’, I ask, ‘really reach or qualify the being of the person I 
lover’ Two remarks are necessary. The first is that, doubtless, 
the beloved cannot be modified empirically by the love he inspires. 
The second is that the reality of each of us, that is to say, if you 
will, the complete notion of each of us, comprehends the feelings 
which we inspire in others. But is not this complete notion a sort 
of ideal fiction? In sum our concern is to know whether there is 
anything in the world that I am trying to explore that corresponds 
to the enrichment of the notion considered in itself. Metaphy- 
sically the problem divides up as follows: (1) Does love bear not 
simply on the idea of being but on being itself?! and (2) can it bear 
on being without affecting being? As regards the first question 
there can be no doubt whatsoever. But the second question seems 
to me very doubtful. I can certainly think my own love as aot 
attaining the being that I love, but perhaps that is a delusion 
of the mind due to the fact that I posit myself as a third in 
relation to both of us, and hence treat us as distinct and separate. 
This is a love that excludes faith. In a word, I seem unable to 
ask the question without depriving it of meaning. On closer 
examination it will be seen that if my love can exercise an action 
on the beloved, it is only inasmuch as this love is not desire; for 
in desire I tend to subordinate the beloved to my own ends, to 
convert the beloved into an object. Thus it is perhaps only 
absolutely disinterested love that is susceptible of affecting the 
thou. And this remark should throw some light on the practical 
function of sanctity. 


December 3rd, 1919 


Ever since yesterday I have been busy with the problem of 
understanding what constitutes praying for a person. At first 
glance it seems as if the person for whom I pray is a third person 


1 Should we also ask whether this same question arises regarding hate, for example, or 
envy? I have a feeling, though I am as yet absolutely unable to justify it, that it only 
has a meaning for love. 


223 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


in relation to God and myself, while on the other hand it is mani- 
fest that he is not simply 4im for me. To pray for a being is to 
have faith in the potential efficacy of the prayer in question; 
it is even, it seems to me, to be convinced that the prayer made 
is not in vain, even if it is not heard in a material way. Here the 
path becomes wide. It seems to me obvious that there is a type of 
prayer for oneself which is legitimate, and a type of prayer for 
others which is not. Prayer for myself seems only able to bear 
on what is susceptible of being regarded as a divine gift, or to 
put it more exactly, I can pray to de more, but not to have more. 
Every day this distinction seems to me more important. We are 
not in any way dealing with what can be possessed, but only 
the use that can be made of the possession. What I have can 
scarcely appear to me as coming from God. In any case I cannot 
pray so that my portion in this world should be increased (see the 
notes of October 19th and 2oth last). In La Grdce I spoke of 
those goods which increase when we communicate them. In so 
far as my prayer for someone else is dictated to me by the con- 
sideration of what is useful to me, it is vicious in its principle. I 
am only allowed to pray for the recovery of my servant inasmuch 
as my servant is my friend. In a word it is only legitimate to pray 
for a thou, and hence a new triad of relations arises, which in 
reality conceals a dual relation. In last analysis I pray God for 
us. In other words I can only pray for someone else when between 
that someone else and myself there is a spiritual community 
whose essential character I tried to express earlier. To pray for 
my own soul and to pray for the person I love is doubtless one 
and the same act. In this way, it seems to me, we get back to 
what I was trying to say yesterday when I spoke of disinterested 
love. Yet I am fully aware that the distinction I am trying to 
establish between what we are and what we possess is far from 
clear. Where, for instance, should we place intelligence? Can 
we pray to become more intelligent? Perhaps, if this does not 
involve praying to be more powerful in order to have more 
mastery over the natural order, but in order that we may partici- 
pate more completely in being. As regards the efficacy of prayer, 
it seems to me that we should be able to find confirmation in 
what I have said about the will. To pray is to refuse to admit that 
all is given. It is to invoke reality considered as will. But are 


224 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


we obliged to say that when I pray I set up being as will, that I 


create it as will? 


December 4th, 1919 
To begin with I think that we should go deeper into the dif- 


ference between praying and requesting. Every request involves 
an appeal to sympathy. If I ask a stranger the way I expect him 
to ‘put himself in my place’, to realise my embarrassment and 
provide me with the information he possesses; and I count on 
his sympathy prompting him to pronounce a word (or make a 
gesture) that he would not have pronounced (or would not 
have made) had I not addressed him. Thus my request is taken as 
being bound to modify my interlocutor’s behaviour. In the case 
of prayer this obviously cannot apply. The more my prayer 
resembles a request, the more it bears on something that can be 
likened to a means of increasing my power (a piece of information, 
any object whatever), and the less it is in the strict sense a prayer. 
Whereas in the measure in which it tends to enrich my being 
itself, it is obviously not addressed to a finite individual. In short 
it seems to me that prayer is always of the type of ‘Abide with 
me, help me.’ Not in the abstract, but in a given and determined 
situation. It would be tempting to say that all sincere prayer is 
prayer that is answered, but this formula is dangerous; for it runs 
the risk of being interpreted as: ‘If you pray with sufficient 
intensity, you will believe that your prayer, if not granted, is at 
least heard.’ Now I believe we must formally oppose any such 
interpretation with all our strength because for the living reality 
of prayer it substitutes a mechanical schema. Moreover, what 
matters is not the intensity of the prayer, but its quality. Of course 
I must admit that this is by no means enough to refute the views of 
the psychologist. We could only achieve that, I think, if we 
showed that psychology always supposes a dualism between what 
is only an individual ‘manner of being and what is really an object; 
whereas this dualism is untenable in metaphysics, and sociology, 
when summoned to the rescue, is incapable of upholding it. 

In any case the problem has to do with what I shall call the 
ontological value of prayer: is prayer anything other than a con- 
tingent interpretation of the real in the phraseology of will? 
I think this question can be resolved by use of the method I have 


225 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


already employed so often. To begin with we must ask ourselves 
what we mean when we say that prayer is only a mode of repre- 
sentation or interpretation. The question is the clearer in that 
manifestly this interpretation transforms the being of the person 
who accepts it. The believer feels he is being helped, and derives 
strength from this feeling. Are we merely to say that he is 
helped because he believes he is being helped? And in what 
circumstances could the opposite happen? Real assistance mani- 
festly needs to be distinguished from faith in it. If I call on 
someone to help me to open a door, I must have confidence in 
him, it may even be that my confidence in him helps to give him 
the strength to open it; but for all that it is he who opens the 
door, it is not opened by my confidence in him. The unbeliever 
wants us to maintain that the divine answer is objective in an 
exactly analogous way. But it seems to me that we have the right 
to point out to him that were assistance recognisable objectively 
it could not be of divine origin.t The act by which I have recourse 
to someone else is of the same type as the acts that I can ac- 
complish myself. At the least it is a prolongation of them. 
But this certainly cannot be said of the help that I implore through 
prayer. Doubtless it will be answered either that this help is not 
really given to me, or else that it emanates from unconscious 
parts of myself. Reflection on this second alternative is badly 
needed. At present I tend to believe in a general way that the 
very idea of applying an etiology to such assistance is meaningless, 
that divine action can no more be understood causally than can 
will itself. But Iam not sure that I am yet capable of establishing 
it for certain, or, rather, I am not sure that I can furnish a positive 
counterpart for the above negation. 


December 7th, 1919 


All the foregoing considerations bring me back to my notes on 
atheism. The unbeliever, as I pointed out, reasons as follows: 
‘Lam within the normal conditions of experience, and yet I have 
not the experience of God. But this experience, if it is real, ought 
to be objective, that is to say it ought to belong to every normal 
being. Hence it is not a real experience.’ Dogmatic atheism, in 


1 Or more exactly that this objectivity can only be recognised by faith, it cannot be 
demonstrated by an observer in general. (Note of 1927.) 


226 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


short, asserts that what is not for one person cannot de for 
another person. But as I said at the time, the idea of ‘normal 
conditions of experience’ may well be meaningless in this con- 
text. Such conditions must necessarily refer to the competence 
of whoever states and defines them. M.D. considers, after enquiry, 
that he is within the normal conditions of experience, that is 
to say that the totality of the (physical and logical) apparatus 
he has at his disposal is in good condition. We are dealing here 
with the order of the potentiality of ‘having’. Were I an ophthal- 
mologist it is probable that after proper examination I should 
have the right to tell someone who sees red when I see green 
that he is making a mistake, in other words that he is not within 
the normal conditions of experience. But can this have any 
application here? I think that were M.D. a psychologist he would 
tell me that though he does not judge his own experience to be 
more normal than a believer’s, he can at least deny to the believer 
any right to objectivise himself, to establish that he is in relation 
with a reality. Only we must be careful to note that it is essential 
to the experience of the believer that he should sez himself in such 
a relation. To deny him this right is not to leave his experience 
intact and merely deprive him of a complement which is arbitrary 
and exterior; it is to mutilate his experience. Of course if the 
believer thinks this reality as an object, as a force of nature, the 
psychologist’s attitude is thereby justified. For in that measure 
the believer straightway gives him the right to verify. But this 
ceases to be the case as soon as the believer reflects his belief and 
prohibits himself from making such an affirmation. Moreover, as 
soon as the psychologist recognises that this faith is real (instead 
of treating it as a simple subjective phenomenon) he associates 
himself with it. I cannot say: ‘God is really for you’ without 
conceding that in a sense he is likewise for me. I said ‘for you.’ 
If indeed I limit myself to saying ‘God is really for him’ it is clear 
that I have not got away from the domain of the objective and 
that I am distorting the relation in question between Aim and God. 
But the psychologist cannot make a judgment in the second person 
without descending from the psychological plane to the human 
plane; he is henceforward only a man amongst men. 

I would like to discover the degree to which this process of 
argument can also be applied to the problem of divine assistance. 


227 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


Some given person says to me: ‘T prayed, and as a result of praying 
I suddenly felt stronger.’ In so far as I proceed as a psychologist 
I must treat a given person as an object, that is to say, as a certain 
kind of system that behaves in such and such a way. Prayer 
appears to me as a process capable of definition that has taken 
place in the centre of this system. Even if I deny it all efficacy, 
I at least declare that it is only the belief in its efficacy that has 
had a causal value in this case. I thus admit that ‘in a subject with 
this particular character the belief in the efficacy of this given 
step can bring with it this given result.’ I make a universal 
proposition regarding ‘suggestion.’ The psychologist thus does 
not address the believer, he speaks of him as of someone who 
has been the site of a given phenomenon. He is a theme for 
discussions and investigations. And in this way the believer’s 
story is branded as null and void. Thus the psychologist pro- 
ceeds in a purely dogmatic way; he treats himself as a norm. 
Of course he will defend himself by saying that he is translating 
into a universal language an affirmation stated in terms that 
cannot be made universal. But the whole point lies in whether 
this translation is legitimate. If I am a believer I will say to the 
psychologist: ‘Are you qualified to translate this experience 
through which you have not lived? Your translation is only 
possible because you have not lived through it.’ 

From this I tend to conclude that when prayer is entirely sin- 
cere and appears in the eyes of the person praying to be answered, 
we are in a realm that is beyond all valid criticism. 


December 15th, 1919 


Two important reflections: 

1. Why is it absurd to imagine that a given individual4 
can demonstrate the existence of God (whereas everything in 
nature can be conceived as capable of being detected by some 
particular person)? That of which the existence was capable of 
demonstration would not be, and could not be, God. The im- 
possibility of an objective proof of the existence of God, the 
absurdity of this way of stating the religious problem—there we 
have something deyond doubt. Show, notably, that to establish 


1 Imagine a news-agency report announcing that Mr. X has discovered the existence 
of God. Why is it radically absurd? 


228 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


that something exists is to identify it and detect it—unless it 
means discovering a relation that is purely ideal. . . . 

2. To think the object is, it seems, to think something for 
which I do not matter (witha reserve to which shall return). Nat- 
uralism treats the whole world, the universe, as an object for which 
I do not matter. But is there any meaning in saying that within 
this totality for which I do not matter, there are parts for which I 
do matter? It seems to me evident that in the measure in which 
I matter for them, they are not parts. This needs to be examined. 

Moreover, in what degree have we the right to say that I do 
not matter for the object? On the contrary at least physically 
it takes me into account. But this relation of object to object is 
not the one we are concerned with here. 


December 17th, 1919 


I was reflecting just now on the relation that can be established 
between God and me, in the measure in which God is in the 
second person and the world is in the third person for us. But is 
the world really able to be in the third person for us? This is 
uncertain. To be able to be in the third person it would have to 
be able to be thought of as foreign to God. I discuss a question 
(politics for instance) with a friend. This question is it for him 
as it is for me. But does the same apply when we are concerned 
with something that touches him more intimately—a secret for 
instance? I tend to believe that to think that the world can be 
an object for God is to deny God as God. But as yet I am unable 
to explain my feeling clearly. Yet certain remarks I made the day- 
before yesterday may help to explain it. To think an object, I 
said, is to think that for which I do not matter . . . “But,’ I may 
be asked, ‘are we not able to think the world in that way?’ Do 
I not lift myself to the idea of the living God for whom I am 
thou from the idea of a world for which I do not matter? The 
dialectic here is perfectly easy to grasp. But, for this relation 
between me and God to be living and enriching, we are concerned 
with whether we must not renounce grasping God as being in 
some way above the universe: in a word, must we not pass beyond 
what is dangerously abstract in such a relation. I tend to think that 
this elevation of the soul to God aéove all that happens is trans- 
itory and is only a preliminary step and a preamble so to speak of 


229 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


religious life. Inasmuch as I only am in the measure in which 
there are things, or beings, let us say, that matter for me, can 
we believe that these things or beings only matter for God in the 
measure in which I place myself between them—and him? That 
would be pure egotism. I only really lift myself up to God from 
the moment at which I think that an infinity of other beings also 
matter for him, or at which I wish they should so matter with 
all my strength. 

I want to probe further into the question as to whether any- 
thing in the world can be exclusively in the third person for God. 
To answer this question in the affirmative would amount to 
recognising that in the world there is something which is abso- 
lutely unable to be loved or saved; but what kind of reality wculd 
that possess? Would it be an empirical reality? We would need 
first of all to ask whether the empirical order can be for God. 
This is a major problem. 


December 18th, 1919 


In F. de Curel’s Fille Sauvage we read: “Here you are, speaking 
as though you admitted the existence of God . . . I speak in 
respect of the most venerable of hypotheses.” And a little 
further on: “God and the immortality of the soul, which are the 
most grandiose conceptions of the human mind, are only dlus- 
trious hypotheses.” It is against this way of thinking that all my 
work is directed. God is that which absolutely cannot be thought as 
hypothesis. For a hypothesis is a certain method of representing 
the way in which things happen in a case in which observation, 
for some reason, is impossible. It is a mode of figuration. But 
this cannot be brought to bear on a being. To love God, to pray 
to God . . . could that have any meaning if God could really be 
treated as a hypothesis? And if it be said that the hypothesis 
consists in admitting that these actions have bearing on a real 
object? In that case I would answer that this word ‘real’ is 
ambiguous here, and its meaning is so far from the meaning of 
‘genuine’ that any attempt at certification would end up by 
suppressing the divine as such. 


January 28th, 1920 


Saw clearly this morning—perhaps partly under the influence 
230 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


of Richardson—the following connection: there is surely a link 
between the fact that the body cannot be treated purely and simply 
as an instrument for the soul, and the fact that the metaphysical 
object (the xowmenon if you like) cannot be regarded as being in 
communication with me. A sensation is not a message, and the 
body is not a machine. I still do not see where this leads but 
it is surely very important. In any case there is enough in it 
to refute the theory of Ward and Richardson according to which 
the object is only a subject as it appears to another subject. For 
this amounts to admitting that the object is interposed between 
subjects. I may be told that there are communications of this 
kind; words, gestures, etc. But everything leads us to think 
that for subjects there can be a communication which is not a 
communication. Might not sensation be of that order? We admit 
in general that sensation is a communication because it implies 
the transmission of something. But can it be compared with the 
reception of a message? (There are a lot of equivocations here 
that need dissipating, because the reception of a message only 
occurs if there is a communication.) When I smell an odour 
do I capture a message? Does to feel mean to decipher? Under 
what conditions can I treat something as a message? 


February 22nd, 1920 


When I wrote on December 2nd that love seemed to me to bear 
on being and not on the idea of being, what did I mean? On the 
contrary, if we listen to common sense, it looks as though I love 
the idea of a being that I form for myself, not this being as it 
is in itself. But what does this mean? That my idea may be 
inexact? This is singularly obscure. Can it really be said that 
I ascribe to this being in question characteristics that he does 
not possess? 


February 23rd, 1920 

All this is terribly confused. When I say ‘I was deceived about 
him,’ that means ‘I construed him inexactly.’ (Just as we can 
construct a curve badly by wrong interpolation or exterpolation 
even when we set out from exact points of reference.) Thus when 
I recognise my mistake I affirm that there is a truth regarding 
this being, that there is a correct construction. But does to 


23% 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


love mean precisely to refuse to treat a being in this way? 

It would doubtless be absurd to say that love is brought to 
bear on that which is unknowable. What is mysterious is not the 
object of love as such, but the type of relationship that love 
involves. It is vain for the lover to enumerate the characteristics 
and the merits of the beloved. He is certain @ priori that any 
such inventory will not give him his love, which is transparent 
in itself. Even if he managed to pick out a special characteristic, 
this special characteristic would still be unexplainable to him: 
it is inasmuch as this characteristic is not treated as such that 
it is active. (One could say that it casts a spell.) Hence the question 
of why has no more meaning in this case than it has when asked 
about what I am. ‘Why am I what I am?’ The answer will of 
course be that this question is not absolutely meaningless: there 
is an etiology about myself. I am infinitely ‘dependent’: yet is it 
this dependence that makes me be what I am? I do not think so. 
This needs further examination. 

I notice in another realm of ideas and as regards the real 
efficacy of love, that if it be true that love only acts on the 
beloved when it is manifested, we are not therefore obliged 
inevitably to conclude from this that love does not act through 
itself, but rather that it only becomes completely itself on con- 
dition that it is manifested. 

I need to reflect on the wnsayable. It is not that which we have 
failed to express in words, but that for which no words can 
be found: it is that which cannot be conceived. But how can we 
speak of what cannot be conceived? We must realise that all we 
can do is allude to it. Yet this is not clear. Is not the word 
that is used to indicate or point out also an allusion? We must 
distinguish. Each time that a particular objective whole is pre- 
sented, the proper word appears as applying to it and indicating 
it. Hence we should expect the unsayable to be that which cannot 
be pointed out or indicated. But what are we to understand by 
that? Do we mean that which can in no circumstances be recog- 
nised, i.e. the pure ‘new’? But even this pure ‘new’ may reappear 
in another context, and hence enable me to give it a name. 
Or are we to suppose that the unsayable is precisely that which 
needs to be treated as incapable of reappearing in this way, as 
absolutely not a content? That idea is more important but we must 


232 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


express it in another way, I think, and say that if we are to be able 
to speak of the unsayable we must precisely avoid this distinction 
between the person who experiences and what is experienced. 
Anything that can be treated as a content is by that ve.y fact 
sayable. 

Do these remarks help us to a better understanding of love? 
Is an explanation of love rightfully impossible? As soon as we 
treat love as a phenomenon we are obliged to account for it in 
terms of attraction, or affinity—that is to say in terms of a relation 
between universals that fail to become explicit as universals. 
But what do we mean by not treating love as a phenomenon? 
Quite simply we mean to love, to love oneself. If I put my em- 
phasis on the fact that someone loves someone else (even myself) 
it becomes impossible to avoid treating this love as a phenomenon, 
a feeling. Whereas if participate in the love I cease all efforts to fit 
it into my logical index; on the contrary I recast my whole being 
so as to be able to penetrate that love. I do not subordinate the 
love to me; I subordinate myself to the love. It will be said that 
objective understanding involves the use of categories that belong 
to no one. But this may be an illusion. In reality these categories 
are common, they are mine in spite of everything—they are 
instruments at my disposal. It is certainly I who understands or 
think I understand; we should distrust the Denkeniiberhaupt 
which is only an abstraction and an abstraction that has been 
singularly misused. Here there is a distinction analogous to the 
distinction between the works that only give us the opportunity 
of bringing our categories into play and the works that enrich 
them. It has been my experience, especially in music, to contrast 
the work that I appreciate immediately because it fits into special 
frameworks or schemas that are already there (reminiscences) 
and the work that I only come to love later but much more 
deeply because it obliges me to invent new categories for it; it 
exercises its authority on me, it becomes a centre which imposes 
on me a regrouping of myself. Here lies the whole mystery of 
conversion.! There is an analogous experience at the origin of 
love. An unknown element (X) that I make no attempt for the 
moment to qualify imposes on me a sort of preliminary dis- 


1Jt would be worth while asking whether there is a sort of secret polarity between this 
‘centre’ and . . . what might be called the depths of the ego. But this is not clear. 


233 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


articulation of myself and it is for that reason that to love is in a 
sense inevitably to suffer. 

But can this initial act be understood? I answer with another 
question: understood by whom? For the lover love is logically 
anterior to any possible reduction. When I love it seems to me 
‘perfectly natural’ to love as I do; I am what I am. Supposing 
it be maintained that this act should be comprehensible or fore- 
seeable for someone else? On what does the privilege of this other, 
absent, person depend? Doubtless at first sight there is something 
intolerable in declaring that love is fundamentally unintelligible. 
But this comes from the fact that people insist on treating me 
as him, as a datum. Relate this to what I said about the will 
(December 1st, last). The basis of will seems to coincide with 
the basis of love. 


February 24th, 1920 


At first this may seem surprising, but does not freedom mean 
choice? When we love do we choose to love? But doubtless we 
must dissociate radically the ideas of choice and freedom. In 
what measure can I say me? That is the real problem. 


February 25th, 1920 


Faith seen as power of attachment to being. Look into the 
implications of that. Return to the idea of trial or test and the 
close bond between it and the very idea of faith. Faith needs to 
be tested. To test means to try out an instrument so as to recognise 
the use to which we can put it. But generally speaking such tests 
do not transform the instrument. For there to be testing there 
must be judgment on self: 1 do not know my capacity of resistance 
to temptation. If temptation arises it will constitute a test for me, 
but only on condition that the judgment on myself for which it 
affords the occasion is efficacious and has a transforming value. 
Can this be? In this judgment on myself a certain real myself 
is at work—a reality which cannot be given as datum and is 
even the antithesis of a datum. A test can only happen if the 
situation in which I am involved brings to birth within me a 
genuine duality between what I am as datum and what I am as a 
person who (ideally) reacts. This duality is obviously relative 
to an identity, which is less thought than felt, between the me 


234 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


that is revealed and the me who judges. The zone of the test 
is the zone of freedom itself. But supposing it be said that all 
I can ever attain is the discovery of what I am already? Here 
we must distinguish between two sorts of reality. Obviously the 
test obliges me to measure myself with myself. Will I come up to 
my own proper level? There lies the whole problem and it can 
only be resolved by my action. The philosophical difficulty is 
aggravated by the fact that the test appears to us not only as 
implying a finality, but also as being inflicted by one being on 
another being. How are we to avoid being obliged to declare 
that this is a mere subjective interpretation, a way of treating 
temptation, for instance, as if it had been sent? But here we 
have once more the old issue. If we state the question in this way 
we take our stand outside the real conditions of religious life. 
If I treat myself as object, if I think God as an agent external 
to myself, in a word if I remain in the order of causality, the 
test loses its spiritual character and becomes a competition. I 
can only appear to myself as willed by thee. When I treat myself 
as an effect I transform myself in my own eyes into him. In the 
residue to which scientific knowledge purports to reduce me, | 
cease to recognise myself. The metaphysical problem of the test 
or trial can only be solved by going more deeply into the willed 
by thee. The relation of filiation is purely actual; it is meaningless 
to throw back into the past the act by which I have been willed. 
To think religiously is to think in the actual in the same species as 
the divine will. Yet even in the actual order what type of relation 
can be established between the infinite totality of conditions 
which determine the present situation and make it to be what 
it is—and the divine will? May not the divine will be only a 
fiction that masks the causes? Or is it a power? And in the latter 
case are we not still confined to the realm of causality? Beyond 
the classical dilemma of a God who is responsible and a God 
who is powerless, we must succeed in finding a solution that is 
surer and less precarious than Royce’s. . . . 


February 27th, 1920 

Re-read my notes on the unjustifiable. What does to justify 
mean? In last analysis it means to justify in relation to oneself, 
to say ‘in such and such circumstances I would have behaved 


235 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


as you did and both of us would have been right.’ I take the 
instance of the man who justifies himself before me. He under- 
takes to establish that the norms to which he has conformed his 
conduct are the very ones to which I claim to conform my own 
conduct—it being of course understood that any gap between 
what I do and what I ought to do is here suppressed. In these 
conditions what happens to the metaphysical problem of the 
unjustifiable? The universe can only be justified personally and 
in function of a divine personality. There is no justification 
possible save for what can be regarded as a way of acting or 
of behaving. Sentimental atheism can be expressed in this way: 
‘If the events that happen in the world are the acts of a God, 
they ought to be capable of justification. Now there are some 
events that are not justifiable; hence those events cannot be pro- 
duced by divine causality. But a powerless God zs not in being.’ 
Are we obliged to establish such a strict connection between 
the idea of divine reality and that of a global justification of what 
happens? I cannot believe it. | 


February 28th, 1920 


As soon as we attempt to compare the universe with a work of 
art one difficulty becomes obvious. How am I to place myself in 
front of this work of art so as to judge it? I am part of it but 
in what sense? This also needs to be gone into. At least it should 
be possible for me to identify myself with the Idea of this work 
of art—and that is absurd. 


February 29th, 1920 


This morning I had the clear intuition that joy is not the mark 
of being but its very upsurge. Joy—fullness. All that is done 
in joy has a religious value; done in joy means done with the 
totality of one’s being. Whereas any separation of the soul from 
itself alienates it from God. This lesson I learnt, and lastingly, 
from Hocking. Hence nothing is more dangerous for spiritual 
development than boredom. When we are bored we feel that we 
are not attached to what we are doing or even to what we are. 
We can bore ourselves and be bored at living with ourselves; 
with living in a state of pure distraction, i.e. a state which is 
not compensated. But cannot one do evil with the whole of one- 


236 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


self? May one not throw one’s whole self into an evil action? 
That also needs to be examined more deeply. 

There is a close connection between the problem of boredom 
and that of time and eternity. To be bored means to lack the 
wherewithal for filling in time, it is to let oneself down. Boredom 
as consciousness of empty time. Eternity as act of unique attention 
to the universe. 

Disquiet. On the one hand the privilege of the religious 
soul seems to be the state of perfect confidence, the state of 
faith. On the other hand we doubt the value of a belief that 
knows no disquiet. This is because religious joy is the antithesis 
of self-satisfaction, but it runs the risk of being confounded with 
self-satisfaction if there is no disquiet. Religious life makes the 
paradoxical claim of conciliating the sentiment of unworthiness 
which is bound up with the very nature of the finite being who 
knows himself as finite, with unwavering faith or what elswhere I 
referred to as the experience of fullness. Hence the complex drama 
with many involutions which makes up the life of the believing 
soul. It is here that we can find the deep meaning of the idea of test 
or trial. Faith needs to triumph over the state of self-division which 
is bound up with the conditions of existence of a finite being. 

All this must be examined more deeply. Fullness is perhaps 
in essence the feeling of resource. As regards others, the death 
of others for instance, we must not purely and simply detach our- 
selves from them (purely formal transcendence); we must hand 
them over, confide them. Here too there is a danger; that of 
facile or fatalistic resignation. 

One’s centre must be not in oneself but in God—outside of 
that there is no religion. 


March ist, 1920 

Yesterday I had a conversation with J. about the death of his 
father and its strange beauty could not have been more striking. 
That kind of death obviously looks as though it were willed. And 
side by side with it there are innumerable deaths that are meaning- 
less, long agonies whose useless cruelty disconcerts our reason. 
Must we take it that there is always a justification—or that there 
never is? It seems hard to conceive a middle term. To say that 


1 M.B... . died in the pulpit immediately after a particularly fervent sermon. 


237 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


there is never a justification is to take one’s stand in the realm 
of objectivity. I am still convinced that an event is only significant 
for the man who lives it or for those who are in a state of com- 
munion with him and form with him a Church—however we 
interpret that word. But are they right, I may be asked, in at- 
taching this particular meaning to this particular experience? But 
the question still is whether we have the right to take into con- 
sideration a reality in relation to which the interpretations we 
make of it must be judged to be ‘purely contingent.’ Here I 
come back to the central theme of my reflections in 1919. I 
already held then that from the standpoint of a thought ‘in general’ 
the question cannot even be asked; that it only arises for the 
individuality that has been re-created in and through faith. 


March 17th, 1920 


It seems to me obvious now that earlier in my effort to determine 
the real content of religious life I failed to attribute a big enough 
part to realism. For to believe means in some way to say: “You 
will see that I was right; one day you will recognise that you are 
wrong.’ In short, for the believer a certain type of verification is 
possible or at least is postulated. Otherwise we would end up 
with the Palais de Sable. We must simply say that this verification 
is certainly not within the reach of all indiscriminately. In this 
religious context it is probably absurd to speak of normal con- 
ditions of experience. It is here that we attain the deepestmeaning of 
the idea of grace. These conditions of experience cannot be posi- 
ted by us but only by God alone. Yes . . . but is this really clear? 


May ist, 1920 

My evolution in the direction of realism has obviously been 
much accentuated in the course of the last month though I cannot 
see exactly where it is leading. For I still feel that this realism 
is ambiguous. Yet I glimpse ahead the whole difficult and new 
work of re-thinking, beyond idealism, notions that we too 
easily took to be over and done with. A state of interior anarchy. 
I am no longer even capable of stating the problems. 


July 3rd, 1920 
. . » Tojudge God, as I have already said, is to judge my portion, 
238 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


my lot. What I would like to examine is the relation between 
the judgment on God and the judgment on self. They seem in 
no way to be the same. So little do I seem to be my lot or portion 
that I would not hesitate to declare in this or that given case 
that I deserve better. But reflection shows that this distinction 
between me and my lot is precarious as I have no quality which 
cannot be regarded as having fallen to me as my lot. For instance 
it is only in a merely empirical sense that I can distinguish between 
a datum and the use I make of it. What further complicates the 
question is that I am able to declare myself ‘personally satisfied’ 
and yet judge the universe to be in itself defective. 


July 4th, 1920 
Temptation and the impossibility of judging-for others. 


July 5th, 1920 
I mean that when we ask ourselves questions about the value of 
the world we live in we inevitably think ourselves obliged to put 
ourselves in the position of other people and ask ourselves 
whether their world is acceptable to them. But I am only able to 
judge my own universe, if that. The universe of others is not 
given to me as datum and hence cannot be an object of my ap- 
preciation. Of course I am almost inevitably driven to put aside 
this difference between their world and mine. By and large I admit 
that, strictly speaking, we have the world in common; but all that I 
have the right to say is that under these or those given conditions 
life would not be tolerable for me. We can go on to ask whether 
under such different conditions I would still be myself, whether 
they would not be the source of new springs within me. 

In short, every judgment expresses a particular selection; and 
yet it claims zo have value. That is Bradley’s paradox. But then... 


July 9th, 1920 

Perhaps the question of what I am worth is only legitimate 
when it is asked in detail and not globally—and the metaphysician 
when he asks it outside the sphere of the particular in which it 
has a meaning, is playing with words. For instance I may ask 
myself what services I am able to render in this or that domain 
—the value of my services being priced on a given market. 


239 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


I can ask myself what is my possible output. But this question 
is not to be confounded with the question of value strictly 
speaking; no religion is possible save on condition that they are 
dissociated.+ 


October 21st, 1920 


About the article on Metaphysics and Psychism on which I am 
working at this moment. I have reached the cardinal point: is 
identification in the ‘spiritist’? sense of the word possible? P. 
maintains that in any case it will always be possible to suppose 
that we are limited to reading into a determined past. But am I 
really able to attain an experience that is not contemporaneous 
with my own experience? The past of a contemporary, if I may 
so express it, is really ‘attached’ to his present—and his present 
can be ‘translived’ by me; but what if this experience is interrupted 
by death? I am fully aware that there is bound to be a contra- 
diction even in my way of stating the question; but in what does 
it consist? Supposing that death is really the cessation of a deter- 
mined experience; is that experience nevertheless still accessible? 
Can I still participate in it? Or recapitulate it in memory? It 
looks as though we can only recapitulate in memory what is 
there—and this part precisely is there no longer. Supposing it be 
maintained that it is only the instrument of normal actualisation, 
i.e. the body, that is no longer there? I am sure that this is 
meaningless. It cannot be maintained that this past survives its 
subject in the way in which a collection survives its proprietor. 
I am my past. If the subject is no longer there, the past as ex- 
perience is no longer there either. Hence I think we are obliged 
to say that the clairvoyant or medium really reascends the stream 
of time. Here is an example: a medium begins talking to me about a 
departed friend and communicates to me, as coming from that 
friend, things I did not not know and which later I recognise to 
be accurate. According to the anti-spiritist interpretation the 
medium recalls with me (or in my place) the scene in which my 
friend and myself played a part; the medium gers back to the 
experience of my friend (at its point of junction with mine) 


*T am fully aware that there is something at least apparently contradictory in these 
remarks. But I maintain that no religion is possible unless the global value of a being can 
be stated in a distinct way, and after all it is not certain that it can. 


240 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


and then reascends it like a water-course. The scene which I 
recapitulate in memory is one and the same as the scene lived by 
him; the scene in my life, the scene in the life of the other person, 
are not incommunicable as the monadists claim; they are a unique 
scene which forms a knot of experiences and we can plunge into 
one as into the other. The past of my friend continues still to be 
attached to the actuality of my experience and this actuality is 
enough to enable his past to be recaptured. 


October 23rd, 1920 


I would like to achieve an exact statement of my metaphysical 
ideas on death, not because they are clear, but at least so as to 
establish the limits of my uncertainty. 

Can we believe that death is the real cessation of personal life 
without implicitly recognising the truth of materialism?! It is a 
gross question and in certain aspects shocking and it is rarely 
stated frankly. To admit that this is the meaning of death is 
to suppose that the xormal conditions in which a consciousness 
can communicate with other consciousnesses are the same as the 
conditions that permit it to communicate with itself; or again, 
that a consciousness only exists if it can communicate by means of 
messages with other consciousnesses. To say that a consciousness 
survives death is to suppose that these conditions are not the 
same. Yet the idea of a solitary after-life may well be unintelligible. 
For a consciousness to exist it is perhaps necessary that it should 
be in relation with others than itself. ‘T’o be examined. 

The problem of personal survival would thus seem bound up 
with the question of the possibility of communications which are 
distinct from those effected by way of messages.” But this con- 
dition though necessary would be isufficient to account for sur- 
vival; for it would still remain to be seen whether X, this new 
mode of communication, were not bound up in some way with the 
normal modes of communication; in such a way that when they 
were abolished it would disappear in its turn. But stated in these 
terms the problem seems insoluble. For we would have to esta- 
blish empirically that this mode of communication, X, subsists 


1 In practice there is a kind of idealism that is at one with dogmatic materialism; this is 
a disagreeable truth to which people prefer to shut their eyes. ; 
4 Thanks, I mean, to the transmission of a material element, whatsoever it be. 


I 241 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


even when the habitual mode has been suppressed. But that is 
impossible. Whether or not I have recourse to an intermediary 
that is distinct from myself, the new communication which is 
established cannot be demonstrated to be independent of the ex- 
istence of my organism (for instance, in the case of automatic 
writing, the apparent communication X which is established 
between me and an entity (?) may really be the result of the 
fact that I am in a certain relationship to myself which is con- 
ditioned by my organism. 

It must be added that the value that we accord to communi- 
cations which are effected by messages is bound up with the fact 
that we can verify their exactness through the normal means of 
information that we have at our disposal. Supposing we could 
conceive a world, a beyond, in which the relations of conscious- 
ness to consciousness were reduced to processes of partial identi- 
fication and participation, that world would be the kingdom of 
the unverifiable. In last analysis even the distinction between 
beings would be abolished like the distinction between experi- 
ences; and the very notion of truth would lose its content. Thus 
if a beyond in this sense exists, we must either presume that com- 
munications by way of messages are still possible in it, or else 
that the beings who people it depend on ‘mediums’ to whom 
they must needs have recourse so as to actualise themselves and 
that they only become self-conscious in the measure in which they 
make use of this kind of ‘mediation’. Is this second alternative 
thinkable? In practice it merges with the anti-spiritist’s hypo- 
thesis. Thus, contrary to appearances, it seems indeed as if a real 
survival of consciousness is only conceivable if in the beyond 
communications by means of messages are still possible; in a 
word if death does not involve disincarnation. 

But can it not be maintained that death, i.e. the destruction 
of the instrument which allows us to send and to receive messages, 
involves the pure and simple negation of a life that is only 
maintained thanks to that interchange of messages? To see 
whether this is really so we must re-examine with the greatest 
care the idea of the message itself. What is the relation between 
myself and the instrument that I make use of—i.e. my body? 
Obviously I do not restrict myself to making use of my body. 
There is a sense in which I am my body, whatever that may mean. 


242 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Note that communication by signs or symbols can only be effected 
on the basis of sensation and that sensation can in no way be 
compared with a message. Beings who did not feel one another, 
that is to say, did not grasp one another as affected, could not 
communicate in that way. And in consequence if death is not an 
absolute cessation it cannot be the pure and simple suppression 
of feeling itself; it can only mean a transformation in the way of 
feeling. If we admit this positive reality of death it becomes 
perfectly obvious that death can be compared to someone of 
whom we have ceased to know anything, someone who can 
give us no information about himself. 

For an inquiry such as the one I am tackling here, it is 
essential to disentangle the exact meaning of the ambiguous 
formula: ‘I am my body’. It can be seen straight away that my 
body is only mine inasmuch as, however confusedly, it is felt. 
The radical abolition of coenesthesia, supposing it were possible, 
would mean the destruction of my body in so far as it is mine. 
If 1 am my body this is in so far as I am a being that feels. It 
seems to me that we can be even more exact and say that I am 
my body in the measure in which my attention is brought to bear 
on my body first of all, that is to say before my attention can be 
fixed on any other object whatsoever. Thus the body would 
benefit from what I may be allowed to call an absolute priority. 

I only am my body more absolutely than I am anything else 
because to be anything else whatsoever I néed first of all to make 
use of my body (here we come back to the idea of the body being 
interposed). 

From this standpoint the problem of death becomes clearer. 
Is it absolute distraction or does some mode of paying attention to 
the real still remain possible after the destruction of what I call 
my body? Yet does not this attention in question imply a centre 
—a point of application—in a word, a body? 

I am jotting down the chance thoughts that occur to me. Per- 
haps at some given moment a way will open up. Is it not only 
inasmuch as it is not an idea, inasmuch as it is not thought as 
object that my body can function as instrument for me? My 
incapacity to carry out a habitual movement if I concentrate my 
attention on it would seem to bear out this remark. 

All that we have so far gathered—and even that is not certain 


243 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


—could be formulated as follows: I am my body (in the sense in 
which Iam my ideas or my work) only in the measure in which 
I do not treat my body as an instrument. There seems to be room 
for a double relation between my body and myself, granting that 
the term relation fits here. But then a singular problem arises. If 
I can only exercise my attention through the medium of my body, 
it follows that my body is in some way unthinkable for me; for in 
last analysis the attention which is concentrated on my body pre- 
supposes it. Supposing it be maintained that what is true for my 
body is not true for the body of others. But it is obvious that I 
can treat myself as him, as someone else, and inversely. 

The argument would thus amount to proving that my body is 
unthinkable, and that when I imagine I am thinking its destruction 
I am really thinking of the destruction of something else which 
is not my body, something that I substitute for my body. To 
posit the absolute priority of the body is to say that the mediation 
of the body is necessary for paying attention to anything what- 
ever, hence for knowing it itself. But under such conditions how 
could the nature of this mediating function come within the 
grasp of attention and so be known? 

Hence it follows that as soon as we posit the absolute priority 
of the body we make it unknowable, by withdrawing it from the 
world of objects. I return once more to this cardinal point. At 
bottom only three hypotheses are possible: 

1. Either we deny the absolute priority of the body which 
amounts to saying that the attention can be exercised on any 
object without mediation. 

2. Or else this priority is recognised, but then either (a) we 
admit that each time the attention is exercised something entersinto 
play which cannot be conceived as object and which, in conse- 
quence, is not identical with what I habitually call my body; or (b) 
we posit that in principle this X and my body must be identical. 

The first hypothesis, I think, must be immediately rejected 
as being incompatible with the structure of our universe. The 
alternative that I have just pointed out, stands. 


October 24th, 1920 


I am not at all sure about the soundness of the observations I 
made yesterday. This is the point I thought I had reached: if J 


244 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


am my body only means ‘my body is an object of actual interest for 
me’ we have nothing that can confer on my body a real priority in 
relation to other objects. This is not so if ‘my body’ is regarded 
as the necessary condition for an object to become a datum for 
my attention. But in that case the attention which is brought to 
bear on my body presupposes the exercise of this mediating 
element which itself falls outside the realm of the knowable. Only 
by an arbitrary step of the mind as in (b) can I identify the body- 
as-object with the body-as-mediator. 

___ But what are we to think of the idea of a primary instrument 
of the attention (whether or not it coincides with what I habitually 
call my body)? From what I pointed out yesterday it emerges that 
no idea of a mediating principle by which the attention can be 
exercised is possible for me. But is that which can in no way be 
an object for me by that very fact incapable of being an object 
for anyone? Can we not conceive a type of organic structure and 
optics of the intellect that are different from ours so that from 
their standpoint the problem would collapse? 

We must first of all delve deeper into the nature of the instru- 
mental relation. Fundamentally it seems to me that every instru- 
ment is a means of extending or of strengthening a ‘power’ that 
we possess. ‘This is just as true as regards a spade as regards a 
microphone. To say that these powers themselves are instruments 
would be merely playing with words; for we would need to 
determine what these powers themselves really prolong. There 
must always be some community of nature between the instru- 
ment and the instrumentalist. But if I look on my body as my 
instrument am I not yielding to a sort of unconscious illusion 
by which I give back to the soul the very powers which are 
merely prolonged by the mechanical dispositions to which [I 
have reduced my body? It must be noted, moreover, that if I deny 
that the body is entirely thinkable, I am contesting that it can 
be treated as an instrument, since an instrument is essentially that 
of which an idea is possible, indeed that which is only possible 
through this idea of it. 

Under such conditions the initial question changes its appear- 
ance. When I insisted on the necessity of a mediation for the 
attention to be concentrated on any object, had I not the impres- 
sion that I was speaking of an instrument? And on the other hand 


245 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


when I said that, strictly speaking, I could not form an idea of that 
mediation, was I not implicitly denying that it was an instru- 
ment? I appear to be involved in a whole network of contra- 
dictions. All this should be taken up in detail. 

If I think of my body as instrument I thereby attribute to 
the soul, whose tool it is, the potentialities which are actualised 
by means of this instrument. Nor is that all. I furthermore 
convert the soul into a body and in that way become involved in 
regression without end. To suppose on the other hand that I can 
become anything whatever, that is to say, that I can identify 
myself with anything whatever, by the minimum act of attention 
implied by an elementary sensation without the intervention of 
any mediation whatsoever, is to undermine the very foundations of 
spiritual life and pulverise the mind into purely successive acts. 
But I can no longer conceive this mediation as being of an instru- 
mental order. I will therefore call it ‘sympathetic mediation.’ Is 
the idea of such mediation possible for an intelligence that is 
different from ours? Once again we need to make a roundabout 
approach. Instrumental mediation and sympathetic mediation 
seem to be bound up together and even unthinkable apart. But 
what exactly does their bond imply? 

All that I can say from the standpoint which I have so far 
attained is that telepathy, for example, is doubtless only a parti- 
cular case of a general mode of mediation which is alone capable of 
making instrumental mediation possible. But obviously we will 
not get an inch nearer the solution of the problem I have stated by 
interposing an unknown occult body between spiritual activity 
and the visible body. Moreover, the expression ‘spiritual activity’ 
does not satify me. Things must be considered on a higher level. 
To say that the attention cannot be exercised directly on an 
object is to refuse to regard the attention as an independent 
reality. Could we not say that attention is always attention to 
self and inversely that there is only self where there is attention? 
Besides it is quite clear that to pay attention to something is 
always to pay attention to oneself as a feeling being. Yet we 
need to grasp that this sedf still falls shore of all objectivity. Here 
we come back to the criticism that I made earlier of formalistic 
doctrine of the ego (as object that has nothing objective about it, 
that is neither a what nor a who). 


246 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


1am unable to appear to myself otherwise than as an attentive 
activity bound up with a certain ‘this’ on which it is exercised and 
without which it would not be itself. But have I not said that no 
idea of this ‘¢his’ is possible? Whereas must it not at every moment 
be a given such, that is to say, must it not be determined? (I 
would not like to insist here on the problem regarding time that 
we will come up against soon enough.) The this of which I am 
speaking is not an object, but the absolute condition for any object 
whatever to be given to me as datum. I wonder whether I would 
be betraying the thought I am trying to ‘bring to birth’ at this 
moment if I said that there is no attention save where there is at 
the same time a certain fundamental way of feeling that cannot in 
any way be converted into an object, that is in no way reduced 
to the Kantian J think (since this is not a universal form) and 
without which the personality is annihilated. To sum up, this 
fundamental sensation is confounded with attention to self (the 
self being no more than absolute immediacy treated as mediation). 

But we must grasp clearly that this Urgefih/ can in no way be 
felt, precisely because it is fundamental. For it could only be 
so in function of other sensations—but by that very fact it would 
lose its priority. But is it not conceivable that for other beings 
placed on another plane, this fundamental quality can on the 
contrary be felt? ... 

When I re-read the bulk of the foregoing reflections I think I 
can see a ‘hole’ in my argument. Can I not be reproached for 
having taken as a sort of self-evident postulate that this funda- 
mental quality cannot be identified with my body? Whereas I am 
really unable to identify the object and the condition of objec- 
tivisation. 

Nor are we at the end of our difficulties. If my body is not 
to be indentified with this mediating quality, how does it happen 
that my body appears to me as being more than an object amongst 
other objects? I think the answer is that for sympathetic media- 
tion to take place, there must also be instrumental mediation. 
Hence, for there to be a medium there must also be a knowable 
instrument—i.e. a body. 

The kind of antinomy involved in all this is essentially bound 


1 The idea of an individual a priori of pure sensibility still seems to me to be a fun- 
damental discovery (1925). 


247 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


up with the very nature of personal life, because were all instru- 
mental mediation lacking, we would be in the realm of pure 
diversity, of that which cannot be grasped. 


October 25th, 1920° 


Actually would I not be back at that immediate that cannot 
be niediatised which I emphasised so much in my enquiries before 
the war? But that immediate would at one and the same time be 
absolute mediation and would only be non-mediatisable for 
itself. I must admit that this is extremely obscure. 

I feel more and more clearly the impossibility of making a 
pronouncement on the nature of this mediation. And this is bound 
to be the case, because strictly speaking we are unable to form 
an idea of it. This morning I glimpsed that this unfelt quality or 
fundamental feeling is capable of not being an absolute constant, 
of being enriched and of growing in the course of experience. This 
is very important but difficult to examine. 

If I am asked what interpretation of the relations between 
the soul and the body I have now reached, I must answer approxi- 
mately as follows: : 

To begin with we must resolutely take our stand outside 
dualism. There are two senses in which my body appears to me 
myself as in a situation of privilege as regards other objects. On 
the one hand it is presented to me as absolute instrument, on 
the other as endowed with priority as regards feeling. The modi- 
fications of which it is the site (or at least certain given modi- 
fications) are the only ones that are experienced immediately. 
But the instrumentalist interpretation is obviously incoherent. 

_ And it still remains to be seen in what that of which I have 
spoken consists. Can I maintain, as I have just said, that my body 
is immediately imposed on my attention? Viewed in this light 
the body could no longer be looked on as a universal instrument; 
moreover, it becomes impossible to see how the attention could 
be applied directly to any object whatsoever and why to one 
given object rather than to another. Let us note that it can never 
be the object as such that invites our attention, but only a defined 
manner of feeling. But if someone says that the attention is 
aroused by certain felt sensations? But what is this attention? 
What gives it its unity? It is an abstraction. There could only be 


248 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


spiritual life where a principle of real unity opposes the dispersal 
of particular ‘states’. To posit this attention as being in itself 
one is to say nothing at all. So that we would be led to affirm 
that the attention is only exercised in an intermediary way by 
means of a definite intermediary quality which makes it be for 
itself and is incapable of being objective. 

If at this point I am asked where consciousness in the strict 
sense is inserted, I answer that it goes without saying that I in 
no way claim that it comes into being. In reality we never at any 
moment lack consciousness. All that can be said here is that [ 
cannot be conscious, save of something which is determined, 
and that attention to oneself can only be viewed as the condition 
of this consciousness. 

Yet all this seems to be still insufficiently elucidated. It may be 
that a renewed analysis of the meaning that we should attribute 
to the question what am I? will enable us to make progress. 

It is plain that there are no judgments of predication whose 
sum could constitute an answer to this question (moreover, the 
idea of sum here is meaningless). And there I think lies the 
-justification (which, by the way, is entirely negative) of sub- 
stantialist theories. I am still convinced that the nearer a being 
is to me spiritually (the less a being is a pure object for me) the 
less it can be characterised. The same applies to me inasmuch as | 
engage in spiritual commerce with myself. When this commerce 
is interrupted I become ‘someone’ for myself. Hence the existence 
of the self seems to be bound up with the impossibility of integral 
self-knowledge. But then what am [? Or rather, what exactly 
do I mean when I ask myself that question? I have said that 
I am the more my past the less I treat my past as a collection of 
events jotted in a notebook as possible answers to eventual 
questions. I am the more the less I look on myself as a tabulation 
or ‘repertory’. But my recent reflections complicate the data of 
this problem in a singular way. 

I am my past. Does not that mean that between my past ex- 
periences and my actual experience there is a relation of sympathy, 
but that this relation is closely bound up with the instrumental 
function of my body? (This is almost orthodox Bergsonism.) 
Is not this global experience which is me, but which far from 
being capable of being objectified is the condition of any possible 


249 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


objectivisation, the mediating element which alone allows the 
attention to bear on itself, that is to say, which alone allows it 
to be? And the impossibility of defining this past-as-subject 
which makes memory possible is only another way of expressing 
the impossibility of treating the mediating element as an object 
and of forming an idea of it. 

It seems to me that I have made a considerable step by 
collating the very abstract results that I reached in these last 
few days with the concrete conclusions I came to previously. 
What I need to get clearer now is whether, as I have suggested, 
this immediate that is not mediatisable for me, can be a datum 
for somebody else. It is plain that if we take the expression some- 
body else literally this is an impossibility. Inasmuch as the some- 
body else is really somebody else he is only an object. As I have 
already pointed out, ‘to see’ into another is to recollect the other, 
even to become the other. Thus this past-as-subject which, as it 
is not an object, is nowhere, needs to be partially liberated and 
‘detailed.’ But how can it be detailed for someone else? I visit 
a clairvoyant. She describes to me people about whom I was 
not thinking but who really played a part in my life. What 
happens? These people really form part of my past-as-subject 
and in some manner they are me; moreover, a kind of will-to- 
identification comes into play under different forms both in the 
clairvoyant and in me; were there no such harmony of wills 
doubtless nothing would happen. This past-as-subject does not 
change place nor does it pass into the clairvoyant—the clair- 
voyant allows herself to be made to participate in it or to be 
penetrated by it. It appears as though this past-as-subject sets 
itself free by the ways that are open to it—the clairvoyant’s 
temporary ‘disactualisation’ puts her at its disposal. If this be the 
case there is no absolutely strict relation between the past-as- 
subject on the one hand and my body on the other. My body is 
only a possible instrument. . . . But we have no right to conclude 
from this that the complex attention-experience is independent 
of all material factors. On the contrary I incline to believe that 
where second sight occurs we must suppose the presence of a 
physical phenomenon which is not thinkable for us because it 
belongs to a type of organism which does not come within the 
scope of our mode of perception; a phenomenon which could 


250 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


nevertheless be perceived by beings endowed with sense-organs 
different from ours. 

Can this be applied to the apparitions that sometimes occur 
at the moment of death? For the moment I leave aside the question 
of synchronism. It is important to note that, as any real trans- 
mission is impossible, there is no reason why the imposed image 
should reflect (?) the real scene. As I view things at present 
lam tempted to attach an extreme importance, for the explanation 
of the phenomenon of telepathy, to the fact that certain clair- 
voyants perceive around the consultant those ‘beings’ who are 
close to him. 4 spiritual aura. But supposing it be said that the 
‘beings’ discerned by the clairvoyant are only ‘ideas’ drawn from 
the consciousness of the consultant? I answer that it is impossible 
that any extraction of an element from a collection can occur 
in this instance. The past-as-subject is the condition which makes 
the ideas possible. I admit that here I am on slippery ground. 
Broadly speaking I can still only see one capital fact. Those beings 
with whom life has associated me have a reality which is not 
objective in the strict sense of the term but which is not purely 
mental either—if by mental we understand private. And this X 
round which all my reflections since the day before yesterday 
have gravitated must needs be in close and indissoluble connection 
with these beings. But if I choose this path, will I not end up 
with the ideo-plastic theory? I still decline to subscribe to it. 
All that I can see is that X can only be grasped in correlation with 
felt presences which subsequently are converted into images. 
This complicates the ‘spiritist’ problem infinitely. For what are 
these ‘presences’? 

What I mean is that telepathy needs to be explained by the 
existence of connections which are analogous to the connections 
which allow the clairvoyant to see around me beings who have 
played a part in my life. This seems to me certain. Yet it is 
extremely difficult to define exactly. What is this relation? 

To begin with, are these ‘presences’ the beings themselves? 
In time gone by I used to think that there was an ontological 
bond between a being and its idea. I am now sure that I was mis- 
taken. But this zs nor an idea. So what then? 

(Is the idea of a spiritual aura capable of more exact state- 
ment?) 


251 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


Unless I am mistaken everything happens as though in parti- 
cular circumstances I were capable of becoming conscious of the 
presence that is detected by the clairvoyant. 

I think that in the past I was right to attach great importance 
to the réle of invocation. But we must understand that invocation 
is a means of making ourselves present to him whom we invoke. 
The word ‘means’, moreover, is quite unsuitable. I must reflect 
further on this. At all events the invocation goes beyond the idea. 
It looks as though the appeal ‘Abide with me’ were converted 
into a fiat, into ‘I will appear to you.’ But what part does the 
approach of death play here? 

Death, unless I am mistaken, is the abolition of the usual 
type of instrumental mediation, and also perhaps the priming of a 
new type of instrumental mediation. It seems certain that there 
is a link between the weakening of the instrumental function and 
the possibility given to the subject of manifesting himself else- 
where, or, in other words, appearing. Yet the metaphysical pro- 
blem still stands. Of what order are these ‘presences’? I think that 
the alternatives object or image (simple image) must be set aside. 
Perhaps these ‘presences’ are the projections of a reality analogous 
to the reality that I possess inasmuch as I am subject, and perhaps 
in consequence they must be posited on a metaphysical plane which 
is anterior to images. To ‘see’ would be to set oneself on this pre- 
objective plane on which I am in a real relationship with my 
spiritual aura or surrounding. Perhaps the latter is inevitably 
imagined in terms of my own personal system or images. 

Is it not, perhaps, legitimate to symbolise these ‘presences’ 
or ‘fundamental qualities’ under the form of fluids? Does not 
this way of symbolising them answer to the instrumental aspect of 
pure sympathetic mediation? 


October 26th, 1920 


As I now see more and more clearly, the dilemma of ‘real object 
or simple image’ is unacceptable because my past inasmuch as 
it is object is neither the one nor the other. Suppose for an - 
instant that a subject can be given as subject. In that event it is 
neither an object nor an image; moreover, we may mistake it, 
because it can only be given as datum seen through a layer of 
images, images that are doubtless familiar to the consultant. 


252 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Were this vesture and interposition lacking, how could it be 
recognisable or identifiable? It would be a merely abstract entity 
or a felt quality. It is, of course, possible that all feeling implies a 
presence that cannot be actualised, or at least a presence that is 
not actualised in practice. By this path we get back to the idea of 
feeling as real conjunction, feeling as extending beyond the private 
domain, beyond the se ipsum. 

The reality of the beings that constitute the spiritual aura 
or surrounding would thus be of the type that belongs to the sub- 
jects as such—the subject coinciding with what I have called the 
mediating quality. 

Nevertheless, lam in no way unaware of the deep obscurity of 
this hypothesis. In what sense can we say that these subjects 
actually exist? The clairvoyant discerns a given presence near 
me. But is this departed person now living? I wonder whether at 
this point I ought not to introduce conceptions whose origin goes 
back to my stay at Zernetz (1912). It is in no way certain, if I 
may so express it, that the coincidence, layer by layer, of the 
becoming of these subjects with my becoming is possible (cf. my 
notes of July 1st, 1919). In a word, it is manifest“ that’ ]l®cannot 
conduct an interrogation about these subjects. The metaphysical 
separation that exists between them and me is as it were the 
counterpart or price paid for the intimacy of the bond that unites 
me with them. A person who gathers information takes his stand 
on the plane of objects; and hence in this domain error must be the rule. 

I must admit that I myself have great difficulty in accepting 
such a complicated notion. Instead of admitting that the clair- 
voyant reaches (?) this order of subjects so as to convert the 
subjects into snapshot images, why not simply suppose that he 
evokes recollections that are familiar to the consultant? But it 
is important to grasp that a minimum hypothesis of this kind does 
not help to throw any light on premonition. Furthermore, I feel 
that the intelligence is forced to accept the idea that there is a 
connection between the type of unity involved in the telepathic 
relation and the type which is manifested by the ‘spiritual aura’. 
We have here a group of views whose systematic value these days 
seems to me striking. 

We need to ask whether prophetic vision does not imply the 
mediation of a subject who, because he is not placed on the same 


253 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


plane of time as we are, grasps as a whole what we can only grasp 
as detail. But is not this ‘detailing’ process necessary for action? 
Bergson. 

To sum up. What attitude must I now adopt towards the 
‘spiritist’ hypothesis? The problem takes on a new form if we 
suppose that the beyond is a world in which messages (instru- 
mental mediations) are still possible; now I thought I saw that on 
the one hand no spiritual life is conceivable without attention, 
and on the other that attention invariably supposes a this which 
can only appear ‘externally’ as body. Yet this does not suppress 
the difficulties raised by the spiritist hypothesis—far from it. 
Nothing allows us to affirm outright that harmony—a communi- 
cation—can be established between ‘transmitting centres’ of dif- 
ferent orders. Here there is a physical problem which may be 
insoluble. On the other hand the durations do not seem to 
coincide; the presents are not homochronous; so that a priori 
we can conceive the need of a mediating organ (which would 
actually be the ‘control’ and would be placed at the intersection 
of the two durations). Nor is that all. It is impossible for us to 
make a pronouncement on the possibilities of the actualisation 
of memory of these hypothetical subjects. Doubtless the past 
cannot be detailed or tabulated for them as it can for us. Probably 
it is we who lend them an organ of actualisation which they can 
only use in a very fumbling and uncertain way. Under such con- 
ditions we can appreciate that the possibilities of error go beyond 
any assignable limit... . : 

The problem of criteria. It seems to me clear that in no 
given case can we be objectively certain that we are in the pre- 
sence of a definite and determined personality; such certainty 
must always be subjective and uncommunicable. The idea of an 
objective certainty in a field like this is absurd, and is excluded 
by the very nature of the facts. Objective knowledge perforce en- 
dows either the medium or the consultant, or both, with mys- 
terious potentialities in indefinite number. This is one of the 
penalties of knowledge, of the idea of objective knowledge. 
Rigorously speaking I do not think that there can be a technique 
of second sight, of prophecy or of necromancy. And about that 
for which there is no technique, a fortiori there can be no scienti- 
fic knowledge. 


254 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


How, in these circumstances, are we to define ‘being a 
medium’? I think there is a sense in which each of us is a medium. 
Could not pure sensation itself be a form of ‘being a medium’? 

Late. I have glimpsed new ideas. Could not dreams and ar- 
tistic creativeness be a sort of rehearsal for this internal trans- 
migration to which I have reduced death? Moreover, does not 
the dream spontaneously become prophetical at a certain depth, 
when the sleeper sees or passes into a consciousness of another 
type, on another scale, and participates in its life, without entering 
into communication with it, without knowing who it is, and 
without even suspecting that it is outside the self? 


October 27th, 1920 


Several points to examine. To begin with, are the beings that 
make up what I have called my spiritual surrounding or aura 
conscious? Look into the meaning of this question. 

This morning during the elementary explanations that I was 
giving to my pupils on the relations of the soul and the body, 
the problem of the instrument occurred to me again with renewed 
force. I am obliged to compare my brain with a keyboard on 
which an unlimited number of combinations can be carried out. 
Yet it would be absurd to say that it is no more than that. I must 
be the instrument. What are we to understand by that, if not that 
the instrument is given to me as datum in sensation? But what is 
immediately given to me falls short as it were of the instrumental 
relationship. Now if to perceive or to imagine anything whatever 
this instrumental action has to be exercised, then this immediate 
datum cannot become object, it must instead be the condition of all 
objectivisation. 

I think that now I can see the meaning and bearing of 
the foregoing inquiries. We are concerned essentially with 
determining the metaphysical conditions of personal existence. 
As regards this, my remarks of the 23rd are of capital importance. 
A world of spirit in which the identification of beings were no 
longer possible, would be in itself contradiction.1 It is essential 
for personalities to be able to identify one another. Without 
that they cease to exist for themselves. Hence, between them, 
messages or instrumental mediations must be possible, and this 


1 Unless this world were a unique consciousness. 


2) 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


excludes disincarnation in the strict sense. Yet the idea of instru- 
mental mediation seems itself to involve contradictions, since 
the being is and is not its instrument, which goes to show that 
here we have a relative category and nothing more. 

Now to ask oneself what are the conditions of personal life 
inevitably involves adopting both an ontological and a pheno- 
menological standpoint. But it is first and foremost the pheno- 
menological standpoint that I am adopting here. A being will 
never be able to appear to itself as a personality unless it appears as 
bound up with a body which it can regard as endowed with an 
absolute priority as regards all other objects, yet which it cannot 
therefore treat merely as instrument. The obscurity that surrounds 
the idea of ‘relation to an organism’ is thus involved in the very 
idea of absolute instrument. Now what am I to say from the 
purely metaphysical point of view regarding the conditions under 
which personal life is able to be realised? If the phenomenal unity 
of the person is bound up with the existence of a body, the real 
unity of the person only seems possible if we suppose an im- 
mediate that is not self-mediatisable, which I will call sensation or 
fundamental experience. It is obviously impossible to deduce the 
phenomenological conditions from the ontological conditions, 
since an object cannot be explained by speaking of something 
which by definition cannot be an object for us. To what extent 
should we emphasise the words: ‘for us’? This is the vital question. 
But we must clearly grasp that this immediate can only be 
apprehended as object where it is not at the same time the con- 
dition of objectivisation, that is to say, by beings whose power of 
apperception it does not mediatise. Yet I admit that this still 
seems to me rather obscure. 

Perhaps there is something here analogous to what happens in 
the instance of any sensation. According to all appearances a 
colour in itself is a determined immediate which appears to me as 
object in virtue of the (unobjectifiable) power of mediation which 
allows me to apprehend anything whatever. But to other minds, 
even this power itself would appear as a quality, just as the 
‘fundamental distillation’ of the flower is presented to me as a 
colour or a perfume. In this sense the metaphysical conditions 
of the possibility of the body would lie in another world. 

Hence ‘materialisation’ in the technical sense of the word 


256 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


appears to be theoretically possible, but the objective conditions 
on which it depends are of necessity indeterminable for us, just as 
are the conditions that govern the apparition of organised bodies. 
Why are we irresistibly inclined to believe that the personality 
depends on conditions that can be determined objectively? Is it 
not because objectivity as such excludes limits (space, time, 
causality: unlimited)? 

I may be asked whether I am really doing anything more than 
resurrecting the idea of spiritual substance. But for me veritable 
substance consists in the object conceived as relation between 
diverse predicates. Now the this of which I have spoken (the 
non-mediatisable immediate) is nothing of the kind and can only 
function as object in a spiritual context that is foreign to our 
world. 

I am perfectly willing to admit that this metaphysical argu- 
ment gives me a feeling of uneasiness. Am I not running the risk 
of confounding what is thought and what is felt? Even if I admit 
that beings belonging to a world different from mine see me other- 
wise than as I see myself, does their sight permit them to explore 
my thought? Am I not becoming a victim of materialistic 
paralogisms? 

Perhaps we must admit that to experience a sensation is really 
to become in some manner the thing sensed, and that’a sort of 
temporary coalescence is established between beings situated on 
different planes of reality, and in consequence belonging to dis- 
tinct worlds? 


October 28th, 1920 


From this standpoint what becomes of the general problem of 
sensation? I leave aside the epistemological question, that of 
knowing how sensation can be interpreted objectively. My con- 
cern is to examine whether sensation itself can be regarded as a 
message. It seems to me that the question is of the same order as 
that regarding the instrumental value of the body. Every message 
supposes a sensation. Sensation can no more be treated as a 
message than the body can be treated simply as an instrument. 

That is, it would be meaningless to suppose that at the outset 
a certain quality is transcribed into movement—is transmitted, 
and then retranscribed. To feel is not to communicate, since all 


257 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


communication supposes a mode of feeling. But then if this initial 
act of feeling is really immediate, how comes it to look as if it 
were conditioned by mediations? And furthermore, how avoid 
comparing blindness to the interruption of a current or of a 
circuit? Sensation appears as though bound up with the normal 
functioning of an instrument. 

Inasmuch as the body is an absolute instrument (or appears to 
be such) it must needs appear to be interposed between us and 
objects, and we are therefore convinced that it mediatises our 
apprehension of the objects; whereas in the only sense that is 
metaphysically valid, treating the body in this way involves a 
contradiction. Examine the consequences of this as regards 
sensation. 

From the point of view of the mechanical world which is the 
world in which we act, the world in relation to which the body 
functions as instrument, sensation is bound inevitably to seem 
emitted and iransmitted. Only, as I have long realised, this 
interposition is in some way illusory. Hence there is a sense in 
which sensation differs radically from any conceivable message. 
But from this new point of view sensation ceases to be defined in 
function of an object. To feel is not to receive but to participate 
in an immediate way. But personal life involves the impossibility 
of dissociating this immediate participation from the inevitable 
appearance of mediation and of communication. Hence the meta- 
physically unintelligible element in sensation. 

_ We need to inquire whether these remarks throw a new light 

on volition and action. To act, it seems to me, is to emit a certain 
quantity of force, it is first and foremost to exteriorise. Such a 
definition is bound up with the instrumentalist view and involves 
the same contradictions. But it has its roots in the very nature 
of personal life. Hence its element of inevitability. If we went 
deeper into this we would get back to the idea of will as relaxation 
that I tried to extricate some time ago. 

Possible transition to the theory of the thou. From the 
instrumentalist standpoint, other consciousnesses are bound to 
appear to be sources of information. Other consciousnesses are 
confounded—yet are not confounded—with their bodies. Show 
here how the him can become a thou. By a real association without 
which the spiritual aura or surrounding could not be made real. 


258 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Could not this association comprehend even things? Thus we 
would find the basis for psychometry; and the possibility of this 


association would depend on the double nature of sensation. 


November 6th, 1920 


I am my body; but I am also my habitual surrounding. This 
is demonstrated by the laceration, the division with myself that 
accompanies exile from my home (this is an order of experience 
that Proust has expressed incomparably). Am I my body in a 
more essential way than I am my habitual surrounding? If this 
question is answered in the negative, then death can only be a 
supreme exile, not an annihilation. This way of stating the 
problem may at first sight seem childish. But that, I think, is 
mistaken. We must take in their strictest interpretation words such 
as belong to (a town, a house, etc.): and the word daceration. It is as 
though adhesions are broken. 

Can all this be defined more exactly? I can see clearly that 
the value of the copula (in I am my body) is uncertain. It has not 
the value here that it has.in the judgment of predication (cf. my 
notes of January 23rd, 1919). 


November 8th, 1920 


There is a close relationship between J am my body and I am my 
past, for my body has registered all my former experiences. Of 
course here a distinction is obligatory. 


November 9th, 1920 


When I say that I am my body I mean that no relation of thing 
to thing (or even of being to being) can here be considered. I am 
not the master or the proprietor of the content of my body, etc. 
It follows that as soon as I treat my body as a thing, I exile 
myself in infinite degree: the negative justification of materialism; 
we end up with the following formula: ‘My body is (an object), 
I am nothing’. The idealists can seek a refuge by saying that I am 
at least the act that posits the objective reality of my body. But 
is this more than a piece of sleight of hand? I am afraid not. 
Between any such idealism and materialism the difference is, so to 
speak, evanescent. Everything happens as though materialism 
were true—and the privilege of the act of feeling which is at the 


259 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


root of the affirmation J am my body and is its necessary founda- 
tion, is left aside. I am only my body in virtue of mysterious 
reasons which account for my continually feeling my body and 
because this feeling conditions for me all other feeling. But am I 
this feeling itself? This feeling seems bound up with real fluctua- 
tions that scarcely seem to me to be capable of bearing on any- 
thing save on the body’s potential action, its instrumental value 
at a given moment. But if this is so my body is only felt inasmuch 
as it is me-as-acting: feeling is a function of acting. But in that 
case would not J am my body signify: ‘I am a determined power 
of acting which apprehends itself as instrument, and at the same 
time grasps itself as alternately inhibited and favoured in its 
exercise by external conditions’? An ‘energetic’ interpretation of 
the body. Unfortunately nothing could be more ambiguous. For 
what is this power of acting? Nothing in this notion or pseudo- 
notion accounts for the real unity implied in feeling (unity some- 
times compromised and as often restored). And if we decide to 
say that I am a being to whom this power ‘belongs’, all the 
difficulties reappear. 

Thus I believe that the formula can only be given a negative 
meaning: i.e., it is not true to say that I am not my body, that 
my body is exterior to a certain central reality of myself, for no 
truth regarding the relation binding this pseudo-reality with my 
body is possible. 


November 18th, 1920 


There is no problem of the relations between the soul and the 
body. I cannot confront myself with my body (as I must do when 
I think an object), and ask what it is in relation.to me. If it is 
thought my body ceases to be mine. 

In short I wonder whether, whereas a body is in itself an 
object, the body of someone does not become—for me who am 
trying to think it—my own body, and straightway therefore 
ceases to be thought. . 

Fundamentally what does to think ‘someone else’ mean? It 
means to set recollections and images in motion round a parti- 
cular centre; but this may take the form of a rudimentary sketch, 
or it may, on the contrary, be a concrete evocation which extends 
beyond available information, and arouses an original flow of 


260 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


recollection and of the imagination: I set myself in a particular 
current and recollections begin to flow. This is only possible 
tegarding beings that I have known. The more real my experience 
has been, the less the dissociation between soul and body is 
possible. What I have been given as datum is neither one nor 
the other (the importance of the evocation of a gesture, of an 
inflection in the voice, etc.). Whereas as soon as I am dealing not 
with the undivided experience of a thou, but with a total col- 
nk of information that I have gathered, I tend to think as a 
ualist. 


November 30th, 1920 


Yesterday I re-read part of my pre-war journal. I clearly see 
the problem that I set before myself at that time. An object as 
such, I said, is given as datum to a thought which sets aside the 
individual element in it. The object as such is defined as being 
independent of the characteristics that make me be this particular 
person and not another person. Thus it is essential to the very 
nature of the olject not to take ‘me’ into account; if I think it as 
having regard to me, in that measure I cease to treat it as an 
object. The cogito is the affirmation of self as universal power 
of intellectual determination. Is God an object in the sense that . 
I have just indicated? The dilemma that I rejectedis, in last analysis, 
that we commonly suppose that if God is not an object, he 
is simply the conceptualised expression of a particular manner of 
being or of feeling which is properly mine. | endeavoured to show 
that this either-or ought to be rejected and that faith, though 
not an objective mode of apprehension, cannot therefore be 
reduced to a more personal disposition. Thus the question 
amounts to asking what is the nature of the subject in the / believe. 
Moreover, it must be clearly grasped that this impersonal thought 
which is the only foundation for objects cannot be constituted 
other than on the basis of personal consciousness. The inexpres- 
sible quality of immediate experience vanishes in the course of the 
dialectic by which the object is constituted. Is a dialectic of 
this kind possible here? To answer this question in the affirmative 
is to affirm that real judgments on God are possible. (We must 
never forget that true and false are qualifications which are 
essentially applied to an answer according to whether that answer 


261 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


is or is not usually accepted by judges who are taken to be per- 
fectly competent.) To answer in the negative is not inevitably 
to say that God is not. All we need to do is to find out in what 
manner God can still be affirmed at this new stage. 

I said that the object as such does not take me into account. 
And there we have the real answer to Bishop Berkeley’s question: 
“What becomes of it in my absence?” It follows that invocation 
is made to someone who is in no measure thought of as an object. 
Invocation is made to thee and there the opposition between the 
thou and the object comes into full light. 

If God is treated as a metaphysical that on which we make 
judgments that we expect to be in harmony with one another, the 
result is chaos. But is there any need for God to be either that 
or to be nothing? When formerly I wrote “No truth concerning 
God is possible,’ I really meant that he cannot be thought as that. 
But if this is so are we not thrown back into pure subjectivity? 
We can at least conceive that the mind is not obliged to accept 
this conclusion, for subjective means ‘contingent in relation to 
object already posited;’ and there we are concerned with thinking 
an order which transcends objectivity. If God is essentially a 
thou, for whom I exist, for whom I matter and who perhaps is only 

. for me inasmuch as he wills to be, it is easy to understand that 
he is capable of not being for my neighbour.! 

Hence we see why no demonstration of the existence of God 
is possible. There is no logical transition by which we can mount 
up to God from a starting point which is not God. If the onto- 
logical proof still stands it is because it is established in God 
at the outset—and in that measure it is suppressed as proof. 

Formerly I tried to go much further and disentangle existence 
from, a connection between the J think and the God is. But the 


whole of the terminology that I employed at that time must be 
modified. 


December 1st, 1920 
The idea of an absolute appeal or an absolute witness. 


I cannot think God without thinking him as absolute appeal; 
and in saying this I emphasise the personal relationship between 
* The ideal substitutions of subject for subject which make objective knowledge possible 


are strictly impossible here. 


262 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


God and me to which Royce, for example, with his theory of the 
All-Knower, pays far too little attention. We can easily grasp why 
the idea of God (the term idea is inadequate) arises with such 
force in the tragic instance of the individual who cannot accept 
his solitude; whereas social life tends to obliterate it (it re- 
appears once more as soon as the compact group to which the 
individual belongs seems to him to be threatened). 

But how can this absolute appeal be declared between beings 
of whom either can legitimately say: ‘I have only thee’? There is 
no reason here to bring in the intervention of divine impartiality 
(indeed, if I may so express it, God seems to me to be universally 
partial). For to judge impartially is to determine whethe a 
given predicate fits a given subject; it is the practical form of 
objectivity. In the eyes of the impartial judge I am a Aim and 
vice versa he is him for me. Now prayer precisely involves a 
refusal to think God as Aim. And in that way we can see the com- 
pleteness of my dependence in relation to God; whereas when I 
am confronted by a Aim I posit myself to be relatively independent 
and detached. The divine judgment cannot be a subsumption; 
I am for God inasmuch as I am unique.! 

Under these circumstances what becomes of the traditional 
opposition between the pure ego and the empirical ego? As I 
conceive things the thinking ego is not to be confounded with the 
idea of an intelligible order in general; it is an act, it is the central 
affirmation involved in every affirmation whatsoever. But it must 
be clearly grasped that we must not establish a difference of 
being and being, between on the one hand the pure ego and on 
the other the individuality defined in time and space that that ego 
apprehends itself as being. In no way can I be regarded as con- 
tingent in relation to myself. And, in the practical order, we cannot 
say that I have been unjustly treated nor can we make a distinction 
between me and the lot or portion life has brought to me. Of 
course I cannot help comparing my portion with that of other 
men and noticing that I am healthier than so-and-so, or poorer, 
and so on. But from the metaphysical point of view I need to 
elevate myself to a global view of myself, and there is no question 
of adding up and making an algebraic sum of my advantages and 
misfortunes. Self-disgust and boredom can poison a life that 
1 God only acts through particular wills. 


263 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


seems to be of the happiest, or faith may illuminate the most 
wretched of destinies. I do not wish to say that for God who sees 
everything a balance is necessarily established between individual 
destinies—that would be to convert God into an equation. 
What I insist on emphasising here is that I cannot compare 
myself with anyone else. And for that reason I am in no condition 
to make any real appreciation of what I am or what I am worth. 
An evaluation bears only on abstractions. 

But can we ascend from this criticism of the idea of lot or 
portion to the affirmation of God? In 1914 I tried to establish 
that as soon as I cease to treat my empirical destiny as a lot or 
portion attributed more or less arbitrarily to someone, I am led 
to recognise that I am willed by God. At first this seems a para- 
dox—because it is the attribution itself that appears at first sight 
to imply the act of a higher will; but, as we see, that will would 
only be a law-maker’s will, it would not be a creator’s will. 
The real difficulty lies elsewhere. Are we not in danger of falling 
into a crude naturalistic theory whereby the ego that is not 
distinct from its lot or portion can only be an object and the out- 
come of the inevitable course of things? The hill that is worn 
away by the waters is confounded with its destiny; do I resemble 
it? It must be answered that I can only think this if I treat all 
reality as being in the third person in relation to the kind of 
community that I form with myself. But in this measure I am 
incapable of avoiding judging reality—and of avoiding judging 
it in relation to me myself. The appeal here is to myself (a certain 
idea of my due, of my rights). Naturalism is possible, it is a per- 
petual temptation of the mind; but when I think as a naturalist I 
destroy myself as individuality. 

I also need to show that the idea of an absolute appeal or 
recourse is in function of faith, for faith is rigorously opposed to 
criticism as such. 

In what way can God answer prayer? Nothing is more foreign 
to genuine religious life than the additions and maximal problems 
that Leibnitz makes his calculating God invent and resolve. 

For a long time I have seen clearly that the ‘action’ of prayer 
cannot be objective—that is to say verifiable. It would be con- 
tradictory to allow that a mind placed in so-called normal con- 
ditions of observation would be able to recognise the effect of 


264 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


prayer. Yet we need to safeguard the reality of the action of 
prayer and of its effect unless we are prepared to see religious 
life reduced to a game of subjective appearances. 

It will be agreed without too much difficulty that prayer can 
transform ‘the state of soul’ of the person who prays; what will 
be contested is that prayer can have any action on an external 
reality. This at first sight appears logical. But I am convinced 
that after complete examination such a position is not tenable. To 
begin with what does the word external mean here? Any such 
exteriority is expressly denied in prayer—prayer is precisely a 
refusal to recognise it. Will it be objected that this exteriority is 
real? But, as can easily be seen, the meaning of these words is 
very obscure. They unquestionably conceal a very confused 
theory of realism. I would like to establish that if prayer can be 
efficacious for me it can also be efficacious for others, because 
I cannot pray for somebody else unless I am in the same relation 
with him as I am in with myself. 

What if it be objected that prayer unleashes a definite force 
but that it is a force that can only operate . . . on the spot? 
But if it is a real force, how can I know the limits within which 
its action will be felt? Supposing it is argued that this force is 
one and the same as the act that unleashes it (auto-suggestion)? 
Even in this case it is impossible to determine in advance the 
sphere in which it will be manifested. In practice, as is obvious, 
auto-suggestion can be converted into a power of external 
suggestion. It seems that my previous reflections on the metaphy- 
sical foundations of telepathy allow me to set aside the realist 
objection that I have just mentioned. At the basis of prayer there 
is a will to union with my fellows—without that, prayer would 
lack all religious value. 


December 2nd, 1920 


But the principal difficulty still stands. As soon as I begin inter- 
preting the outcome I seem to move into the sphere of the arbit- 
rary; it is difficult for us not to believe in the possibility of truth 
regarding whether or not my prayer has been heard. I have 
always maintained that we must be careful not to treat interpre- 
tation in this field as contingent in relation to facts, to truths 
that can be stated... . 


265 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


If I ask myself what in practice is God’s attitude regarding 
my prayer I convert my prayer into an object and I set myself 
outside the sphere of invocation. If I ask myself whether my 
prayer has in fact been heard it is no longer of a prayer that I 
am thinking—I am only thinking of a step I have taken with 
regard to some kind of power. As I expressed it before, when we 
speak of God it is not of God that we are speaking. ‘Io suppose 
that it could be otherwise is to come down to the crude idea that 
it is possible to keep accounts with God. In a word, under no 
circumstances can prayer be treated as a means about which 
we can interrogate ourselves retrospectively or whose efficacy 
we can question. Pragmatism in this field is the very negation 
of religion. This consideration involves other consequences that 
are very important. To pray implies a refusal to treat the present 
situation as a case that is capable of occurring a second time, 
for which we can once more use the same means if they have 
already proved their efficacy. Religious thought is only exercised 
on the present. For religious thought the present moment can 
never be resumed in a law of which it is merely one example. 
So prayer is renewal, it is so to speak an active negation of ex- 
perience. Moreover, the religious soul knows no precedents. ‘The 
religious soul is forever calling everything back into question; 
there is no such thing as an established possession—and this is 
only an indirect way of defining hope. 

But if we adopt this standpoint how can we safeguard the 
unity and continuity of religious life? And first and foremost how 
can we still speak of the divine will and of God’s plan? The 
difficulty lies in this, that I cannot treat the divine will either 
as a given determined will (which would be in the third person for 
me) nor as an abstract order. It is chy will and in consequence it 
is not imposed; I can only submit myself to it freely, “Thy will 
be done.’ Yet it is obvious that if this will cannot appear to 
me as determined, as not necessarily coinciding with mine, it is 
no more than a seal that my fantasy affixes either to my own whim 
or to the event in question. Hence a criteriology of divine will 
would have to be possible. But this implies a contradiction: for 


* It goes without saying that this is only a marginal attitude and that in practice prayer 
tends inevitably to be treated as a means. Between a certain kind of religion and a 
certain kind of sorcery, no rigid line of demarcation is possible. 


266 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


there is only a criterion in the abstract; if we are given a particular 
category the question is whether a given case can enter into it. 
We set out from an abstract notion such as that of justice and we 
ask ourselves whether a particular case can be brought under this 
general heading, if a given way of willing can be called ‘just’. 
Now any such interpretation is the very negation of God— 
_indeed in practice it is implied by every atheistic theory. This 
is the real meaning of statements such as that ‘the will of God 
cannot be sounded’. I admit that I am not sure that the problem 
I have just stated can be solved; because after the event I can 
neither hope to recognise what God willed nor—which amounts 
to the same thing—can I affirm globally that everything that 
happens is willed by him. Moreover, there is another problem 
here—the problem of quietism. How am I to avoid the tempt- 
ation of pure abandonment to the divine will? Yet I feel con- 
fusedly that if I abandon myself entirely to God it is not to God 
that I am abandoning myself. 

Hence there is still a great deal of obscurity. I feel inclined 
to think that we must not look on the idea of the divine will as 
a principle that is susceptible of determining our conduct. By this 
I mean that if I am confronted with a situation which forces me 
to choose between different possible paths it is meaningless to 
ask: ‘Which is the way that God wishes me to take?’ For that 
would imply the criteriology of which I have already spoken; a 
criteriology which is essential to ethics, but which is completely 
foreign to religion, because religion bears on being, on concrete 
and total individuality. This criteriology is as foreign to religion 
as it is to love. Prayer, which is at bottom the act by which 
I affirm myself to be dependent, is as essential to religion as 
autonomy is to morals. The idea of a moral objectivity is more or 
less modelled on the objectivity of knowing." 

I think I can see what we mean when we speak of ‘praying 
to be enlightened’. Doubtless the enlightenment for which prayer 
appeals has no resemblance to the enlightenment which is derived 
from an enquiry or even froma chain of reflections. The condition 
of the heart from which prayer flows forth is unique for the 


1 Nowadays all this seems to me very obscure and questionable. In practice is not the 
believer constantly obliged to refer back to the idea that he forms of the divine will as 
considered in relation to himself and to his own individuality? What I wanted to say, I 
think, is that here we should substitute prayer for reflection. (Note of 1925.) 


267 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


subject and unique for God: thus it calls for ispiration. At this 
point we see the full contrast between the moral order and the 
religious order. 

What I have just said can be illustrated by the example of a 
conversion. I could add, moreover, that we can regard every 
predicament as a trial or test; for in practice it involves a tempta- 
tion and a wager. Religious life is only for souls that know them- 
selves to be threatened. To pray that I shall be enlightened is to 
pray to be so placed as to be able to see how the spiritual wager 
can be won. 


December 3rd, 1920 


. .. 1 do not think that Royce was right when he maintained 
that the idea of an omniscient and really existing thought is 
involved in every search after truth. It seems to me that he has 
not made sufficiently explicit the sense in which it is true to say 
that every question that is properly asked presupposes that an 
answer is, in actuality, already given. The nerve of his argument 
lies in the criticism of the idea of bare possibility. According 
to Royce it is not possible that the answer to our questions 
should only exist in the state of potentiality—because the poten- 
tial supposes the actual. But my question is whether the very 
notion of answer inasmuch as it is answer must not be referred 
to a dialectical attitude of the mind. If that is so we only have 
the right to state that there really is something which is suscep- 
tible of being converted into an answer under particular con- 
ditions; we cannot say that the whole of this answer already 
exists as such for an omni-comprehensive prayer. (I believe further- 
more that if an omni-comprehensive thought is conceivable it 
is on condition that it is situated, if I may so express it, on a plane 
on which dialectics disappear and there are no more questions 
and answers, either actual or potential. And I am not sure that 
this does not lead us back to the Kantian and post-Kantian notion 
of the intuitive understanding.) 

An idea occurred to me this afternoon that may be impor- 
tant. Could we not say that any judgment of existence implies 
a deviation of the mind from the dialectical attitude that 
makes the affirmation of any object possible? This would en- 
able us to see immediately why any existence is not a predicate; 


268 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


because a predicate is always an answer, a dialectical element. 
We would also be able to appreciate that dialectics operate 
in the realm of pure hypothesis and fall short of the existential 
realm. 

Long ago I realised that every existant must appear to me as 
prolonging my body in some direction or other—my body inas- 
much as it is mine, that is to say, inasmuch as it is non-objective. In 
this sense my body is at one and the same time the prototype of an 
existant and in a still deeper sense a landmark for existants. 
The world exists in the measure in which I have relations with it 
which are of the same type as my relations with my own body— 
_that is to say inasmuch as I am incarnate. I have already noted 
that it is incarnation that makes the dialectical standpoint possible. 
Dialectics which were not based on an experience which is not 
completely mediatisable would not even be dialectics. This brings 
me back to my reflections of last October. The non-instrumental 
mediation that I tried to define as being the condition of any 
sort of objectivity would thus be the secret spring of the existential 
judgment. 


December 4th, 1920 


Unless I am mistaken existence can only be sensed, as sensation 
is the mode in which the continuity of anything whatever with my 
body can be given to me as datum. This would give us a meta- 
physical foundation for ‘sensism’ which, within limits, is fully 
legitimate. Of course I would need to show why | cannot avoid 
thinking the world of existences as infinitely surpassing what is 
either felt actually or is susceptible of being felt by me. Do not 
dialectics introduce this infinity into our existential judgment? 
[Dialectics—Infinite—Relativity.] 


December 7th, 1920 


Glimpsed confusedly that—on the plane on which there are 
souls—events may possibly be ordered for souls inasmuch as 
they are souls. That would amount to saying that a soul would 
only be possible in the measure in which an order, defined up 
to a certain point in relation to that soul, were able to be mani- 
fested in events; furthermore the soul and the order would not be 
two separate things but one only. This would give us an explana- 


269 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


tion of the strange conformity between what we are and what 
happens to us. 


December 9th, 1920 

I am inclined to think that there can only be a body where 
there is the act of feeling, and for there to be this feeling the 
distinction between the here and there needs to cease to be rigid. 
The distinction is only valid on the instrumental plane. Now 
the body-as-instrument supposes a metaphysical body (the real 
kernel of the doubtless mythical notion of the ‘fluid body’). 
Am I in process of discovering the ontological foundations 
of invocation? This must be looked into very carefully. 
(Because this particular road might in the end lead me to 
fetishism.) 

These days I am very preoccupied with the phenomena of 
vision through solids yet I cannot manage to state the problem 
in satisfactory terms. | am convinced that the idea of sensation 
is still the key. 

I must admit that what I can see at present is rather vague. 
In front of me I have a gummed-up letter. Normally I can only 
get to know its contents if I go through certain movements. 
In that case the ‘sensation’ is clearly in function of a determined 
instrumental activity. And even the idea of the closed book has 
reference to steps that it is possible for me to take. In a word, the 
order in accord with which objects are set out for us is relative 
to the activity of the body-as-instrument, but as soon as I cease 
to treat my body as an instrument the correlative order of objects 
is likewise transformed. 

As example I take the clairvoyant who from a distance des- 
cribes to me what is happening in my flat. Inasmuch as his vision 
is ordered in relation to his instrumental activity, it does not really 
differ from mine and it is subject to the same limitations. But 
here our task is on another plane and we need to understand how a 
re-grouping of the real is possible. We usually suppose that this 
re-grouping implies an objective change. To see what is happen- 
ing in some particular place we imagine that we must go there, 
that is to say that we must put our instruments or registering 
apparatus within reach. In this way many occultists suppose that 
I have at my disposal a second body that I can send to represent 


270 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


me, a sort of messenger who makes the trip on my behalf and 
brings me the relevant information. But this seems to me absurd; 
and there is no reason why we should envisage such a hypothesis 
if we set out by recognising the relativity of the instrumental 
point of view. 

At this point it would be worth while to re-examine Mill’s 
definition so as to see what exactly it means. To say that matter 
is a permanent possibility of sensation is surely to suppose that 
it is a possibility of actions made by the body to which deter- 
mined sensations normally correspond. The ‘phenomenist’ 
theory of knowledge is entirely dependent on the idea of this 
connection. ; 

But this definition is obviously unsatisfactory. We cannot 
admit that existence should be defined as a mere possibility; 
moreover, the clairvoyant’s vision seems bound up with the fact 
that there is a margin between existence and possibility—a 
margin that is deliberately ignored in rational foresight. Thus a 
re-grouping, which implies no change in the disposition of the 
‘elements’, must somehow be possible. The clairvoyant has no 
need to act in order to see—on the contrary his vision is in func- 
tion of his passivity just as much as my normal perception is in 
function of my activity. But on the other hand, unless I 
am mistaken, the structure of an acting being of necessity 
implies at least the ideal possibility of this kind of vision. 
Under what conditions can it occur? I can now see clearly 
that the future is the more apparent to a being the less that 
being is prisoner of his own activity and of his own value as 
instrument.1 The world of time is no less completely dis- 
posed in relation to my instrumental activity than the world of 
space. 


December toth, 1920 


In other words the ‘disactualisation’ of the clairvoyant is a par- 
tial ‘disincarnation.’ But to leave one’s body means to cease to 
make use of it. 1 do not deceive myself about the obscurity of ail 


1 J note in passing that in the field of psychology this also applies to the totality of the 
means, of the ideas, that I bring into operation so as to face up to a situation. There is a 
vigilant, active and tense attention which is the very antithesis of vision. The man 
who is on the watch sees nothing. I think that this is the only way to explain the 
mysterious gifts of certain naive people (for instance of Dostoevsky). 


271 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


this. Does the body nevertheless still condition vision? In that 
case it is still an instrument. If it does not condition vision, 
then the ‘disincarnation’ is defective—which is very mysterious 
if not unintelligible. 

It may well be that the problem can be stated more clearly in 
terms of time. Simultaneity can only be thought in function 
of potential perception. What is happening at this moment in 
Pekin is what I would be able to perceive were I there; in 
this sense the idea of the present is in function of an instru- 
mentalist representation of the self. When I say that vision is 
not perception I am saying precisely that it implies nothing 


of this kind. 


December 15th, 1920 


I come back to the notion of the divine will. I cannot think 
the divine will as a historical factor, but only as in relation with 
my task. I can conceive of a man like Paderewski being anxious 
to know whether it is God’s will that Poland should survive. 
But it would be absurd for a foreign journalist to ask himself 
such a question because his attitude is purely critical and for 
him Poland is not ‘my Poland.’ I felt this before when I said that 
God can only be defined for real individuality and never for 
thought in general. The critic is only someone who claims to 
see clearly; he has no cause to defend. This links up, on a deeper 
level, with Royce’s idea of loyalism. But though the notion of 
universal loyalism has an ethical value that is incontestable, I 
think it is foreign to religion. 

We are still confronted with the same question. Am I able to 
discern whether God loves the cause I am serving? If an experi- 
ence of divine adhesion or approval is possible, this must either 
be within the order of feeling—which is very fleeting and unsure 
—or else it must be reflected, and must presuppose a criteriology 
which seems to me illegitimate even in principle. To ask oneself 
‘what God thinks’ is either to interrogate oneself about truth 
which is conceived impersonally, or else to convert God into 
somebody with whom I cannot see why I should necessarily agree. 
This only goes to prove that I am stating the problem badly, that 
the question is contradictory, and that prayer is not of this order. 
It can be shown that it is fundamentally absurd to ‘try to put 


272 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


oneself in God’s place’, and yet that is just what the question 
“What is God thinking?’ implies. 


December 17th, 1920 


I return to the problem of the relations of time and action. 
I appear in my own eyes as contemporary with the things on 
which my action has a grip. At first sight this seems paradoxical. 
Is not my action conditioned by the mode in which I am inserted 
into time? Is not the fundamental datum—my daze? But what do 
we mean by that? 

The idea of date seems to me correlative with the idea of 
event. A date is a number attached to an event within a particular 
series. | have a date inasmuch as I treat myself as an event. But 
an event is not the same as a predicate; in principle an event is an 
external circumstance which plays its part in modifying the con- 
tent of the life of a mind. Moreover, it needs to be represented by 
the person whose development it is to influence. A subject is not 
an event. | am tempted to anticipate a process of argument that 
I feel lies ahead and say: “The event as such cannot be a datum 
given to a vision.’ 


January 30th, 1921 


During the last few days I have been feeling strongly the need 
to define exactly what I mean by the notion of the absolute thou. 
I need to be on my guard against a possible mistake, that of 
attempting to enclose God within the circle of his relations with 
me. In reality to think God is also to think that it is not only I 
who count for him. But then there is the problem of how to 
avoid treating oneself as an element which God ‘takes into 
account.’ Fundamentally I am always up against the same 
problem. 


April 11th, 1921 . 
I have been re-reading my notes of December last on the question 
of existence. I think they suggest a whole world that needs 
exploring. Here are the essential points: 

1. For me all existence is constructed on the model of and 
in prolongation of the existence of my body. 

2. Unawares I insert into my notion of existing object that 


K 273 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


which in my body (inasmuch as it is mine) transcends objectivity, 
that which does not derive from any dialectical process but itself 
makes dialectics possible. 

3. Thus between me and all that exists there is a relation 
(the word is quite inadequate) of the same type as the relation 
that unites me to my body; instrumental or objective mediation 
is completed by what I have called a non-instrumental mediation. 
This amounts to saying that my body is in sympathy with things. 

4. And in this way a certain mode of vision becomes possible. 

In other words, I want to show that I am really attached to 
and really adhere to all that exists—to the universe which is my 
universe and whose centre is my body. 


May 23rd, 1921 

When I re-read my notes I observe that one of my usual 
methods of research consists in reasoning somewhat as follows: 
Admitting the hypothesis that this given phenomenon is real, 
what are the conditions under which it is able to be real? When I 
have determined those conditions by analysis do they not allow 
me to understand that which in practice is unintelligible in normal 
experience? 


May 26th, 1921 

At bottom my attitude to existence consists in maintaining 
that Berkeley’s esse est percipi is only true on condition that by 
perception we understand not representation but a prolongation 
of the act by which I apprehend my body as mine. If per impos- 
sibile a radical discontinuity between my body and any part of 
the world whatsoever were conceivable, I cannot see by what 
right I could still maintain that that part exists. Is it possible to 
object that it is arbitrary to identify existence in general and 
existence that can be grasped by the senses? But this is a question 
—though a major one—of pure terminology. To say of an idea 
that it exists seems to me meaningless. Yet I cannot avoid thinking 
that what is mental exists. But perhaps this is the point at which 
we need to bring in the quasi-occult notions to which I had 
recourse earlier. | must suppose that what is mental for me is 
capable of being sensed by others. The necessity of making a 


criticism of the notion of the senses. 
274 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Is it not after all conceivable that an idea should exist as 
a perfume exists? But what if it be said that a perfume is material? 
That is nonsense. The whole Cartesian criticism of the secondary 
qualities needs to be taken up anew. 


June 3rd, 1921 

I now seem to be in a position to formulate my process of argu- 
ment of last October in the following way: I can only pay 
attention to an object in the measure in which the object affects 
me in some way. This ‘affection’ that I feel is as it were the 
middle term, and if it be lacking I cannot even conceive the 
possibility of exercising attention. But this affection cannot be 
an object, otherwise we would get involved in an infinite regres- 
sion. What follows from this regarding the body itself is obvious. 
The body appears at first sight as the supreme object of actual 
interest or as the privileged object which is interposed between 
me and all other objects. Yet if the body zs only an object we need 
to re-establish between my attention and the body the modifi- 
cation of feeling, otherwise the body would not even be an object. 
But it may be said: This proves that the body must be sensed 
before it is an object. But what do we mean when we declare that 
the body must be sensed? It is here that the difficulties begin. 
For we want to know whether this sensation supposes that an 
instrument comes into action. Ought the body to be regarded as 
an instrument of which I am bound to make use so as to experience 
sensations, as | am bound to make use of a telephone if I want to 
‘ring someone up’? That is obviously absurd. I can only think 
my body as instrument on condition that I take for granted the 
—logically anterior—existence of a body that is not an instrument. 
So that from every point of view we are led to conceive a sensation 
which is not a message, an immediate that is presupposed by all 
mediation because this immediate, if I may so put it, is absolute 
mediation (that is to say, presence of the universe for everything 
that exists). 

I admit that this interpretation involves a partial rehabilita- 
tion of substantialism; but its distinguishing feature is that it 
implies that we are not permitted to objectivise the fundamental 
_ quality. I only am inasmuch as this quality is not an object for 

me. Possible transition to the theory of love. 


275 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


There is no denying the uneasiness I feel when I review this 
thesis. Does it not amount to attributing to myself an unspeci- 
fiable, that is to say contradictory, predicate? But this, I think, 
is only in appearance. For we must take care to notice that 
even the form of predication has no application here. We are 
really dealing with a particular kind of being that is given to 
itself as datum though it is nevertheless incapable of treating 
itself absolutely as object. There is thus nothing in it to be 
indicated. 

This point becomes clear when we realise that the question 
What am I? cannot be converted into the question What is he? 
without becoming meaningless. This would not be so in an 
instance in which the question was about a predicate. In a word, 
it is of the essence of a being who acts and who apprehends 
himself as acting that he should be given to himself as datum in a 
special and immediate way, a way which mediatises everything in 
his experience that can assume the figuration of object. 

Add to this that if we take the word history in its strictest 
sense it is not true to say that I am my history, that I can be 
reduced to the totality of the determinations that an all-knowing 
historian might attribute to me. This amounts to saying that the 
historian’s point of view, if I may so express it, is eccentric as 
regards the real. 

This obscure doctrine becomes a little clearer if we remember 
that my body is my present and that I cannot identify myself with 
this present without denying everything in me which makes me 
myself. But I do not transcend my present merely by thinking 
myself as a succession of presents, as history. Recently in a con- 
ference on music I said that there is a point at which all our past 
becomes feeling, and it is at that point that music takes its rise. To 
understand what this means we must refer to the idea of the past as 
it is felt. Considered globally that past is myself; it is my history 
as turned into feeling, (as interiorised in feeling—which is only 
possible beyond historical thought). Here there lies a field which 
is intermediate between the duration of the body and eternity 
and it may serve as a basis for a theory of prophecy. 

I have been re-reading my notes on the spiritual aura or 
surrounding. There is no reason why we should accept the 
monadist theory that this substance-quality which conditions and 


276 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


centres my experience must essentially be isolated. Indeed there 
may well be reason to think that it is bound up with other 
substance-qualities, that it is pledged in a personal context which 
the normal conditions of experience do not allow to become 
explicit. Possible transposition of the communion of saints. The 
spiritual solitude to which the monadists refer is created for 
himself by the knowing subject. 


December 8th, 1921 


I would like to make an effort to clear up once and for all the 
ideas that I have been developing during the last year regarding 
the body and sensation. I am more and more convinced that the 
key to all problems lies here. To admit that the ‘problem of sensa- 
tion, or of the relations between the soul and the body’ is unin- 
telligible, would be purely and simply to throw up the sponge. 

Usually we suppose: 

(a) Either that sensation makes use of a personal code so as to 
translate something which in itself is a kind of commotion or 
vibration transmitted from one point in space to another, 

(b) Or else that sensation is a real message which had to 
travel under a disguise so as to reach us and be deciphered by us. 

Strictly speaking we cannot describe the first alternative as a 
message. What is given to me as a scent or as a colour is not a 
scent or a colour at the outset. With the second alternative it is 
otherwise. In view of the fact that verification is totally impos- 
sible many scientists and philosophers refuse to choose between 
these two alternatives. How can I ‘leap out of what I am’ so as to 
explore whether the ignotum quid which in me becomes sensation 
was already sensation before it penetrated into my universe? An 
idealist would go so far as to say that the question is meaningless. 
He would declare that ‘as this universe is mental it cannot be 
compared to a region in space into which something can enter, 
and so dispose of the question. But is this possible? I am afraid 
the argument is no more than a piece of logical conjuring. I 
breathe a scent and verify that it derives from the nearby flower- 
bed. Of course I agree that it is meaningless to say that the flower- 
bed is external to my consciousness. It is no more external than 
my body itself. But what are we to conclude from that? A physi- 
cist would say that a transmission of a wave of particular effluvia 


277 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


has taken place and that that transmission can be given a physical 
definition. Something has travelled between the flower-bed F and 
my body, B. I am perfectly capable of conceiving that some 
obstaclé may be interposed between F and B which makes this 
journey impossible. It is usually supposed (a) that what is in 
itself only a physical event (the fact that certain particles emitted 
by F impinge on the olfactory nerve—or some analogous fact) 
is translated by me into terms of sensation. But some people (b) 
presume that at the origin of the transmission there is something 
analogous to that which is presented to my consciousness, so that 
we are really dealing with a sort of message that was first tran- 
scribed and then re-transcribed. But we must observe that the 
hypothesis that a first transcription occurred at the outset does 
nothing to render intelligible the re-transcription which, both in 
cases (a) and (b), I am admittedly obliged to perform myself. 
And it is very difficult to see why we are bound to think that the 
transcription and the re-transcription in question should be in 
exact correspondence with one another, as nothing obliges us to 
suppose that there are two instruments that at one and the same 
time function in an analogous and an inverse way. So let us leave 
(b) aside and set about examining whether the translation implied 
by (a) is really thinkable. What happens when I translate? To 
put it briefly I substitute one group of objective data for another 
group of objective data. Here, instead of objects we can speak 
of instruments. | make use of a certain instrument i place of 
another instrument (this can also be applied to a translation from 
one language into another or to a transposition of a piece of music 
for some other instrument). In other words I must substitute 
something which is given to me as datum or that I give to myself 
in some particular way for something which was given me in 
another way. But, as is obvious, nothing of this kind happens in 
the instance that concerns us here. For it is of the character of the 
physical event that it is not given to me as datum. It occurs on 
a plane that could be called infra-sensorial. Moreover, even if 
it were given to me as datum that could only be thanks to sensa- 
tions for which the problem would arise anew. Hence, if my 
reasoning is correct, to treat sensation as translation is meaning- 
less. Sensation is strictly immediate and can in no way be regarded 
as the interpretation of something which is other than itself. It is 


278 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


the basis of all interpretation and communication and thus it itself 
cannot be an interpretation or a communication. But it is obvious 
that I cannot speak of immediate sensation and of an object at one 
and the same time. The moment I refer the sensation to the object 
or treat it as a kind of emanation of the object I am no longer 
speaking strictly of sensation: I am outside the realm of the 
immediate. But action is only possible inasmuch as I succeed in 
defining objects, inasmuch, therefore, as I treat sensations as 
‘Messages and do not trouble about the fact that it is radically 
absurd to consider them in that way. Thus I am inevitably 
led to look on sensation from two contradictory and incompatible 
points of view. In one way it is true to say that sensation is 
immediate, in another I am obliged to view it as a message that has 
been sent out and transmitted and is capable of being received. 
Yet it must be admitted that there is something disturbing about 
this antinomy. If visual sensations are immediate, how is blindness 
possible? Why does everything that happens suggest that messages 
are received if in reality they are not? If I block my ears, I do 
not hear what is said to me; how is that possible? In practice does 
not everything combine to suggest that the interpretation I am 
rejecting is the true one? Why then say that it is false? 

I note to begin with that facts such as those that I have just 
mentioned are in no way unintelligible granted we interpret them 
correctly. There is no doubting that something ceases to be trans- 
mitted, that something is received. But the whole question is 
whether this something is sensation. “That is of no importance,’ 
I may be told. “The failure of a particular physical event to take 
place is enough in its turn to prevent the sensation from taking 
place. This is enough to justify our affirming that sensation is in 
function of the physical event.’ But I would like to observe that 
this kind of statement is very vague. From the fact that this 
particular sensation can only be experienced when the body 
adopts a given attitude or has a given disposition, can we con- 
clude that sensation is really the translation of a physical event? 
Surely not. May we not maintain that a certain attitude of the 
body is necessary for the evocation of a given recollection 
without thereby affirming that the recollection is no more than a 
translation of a momentary arrangement of cells? Considered 
in themselves, sensations that are never actualised (or rather, 


279 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


pure feelings) cannot validly be referred to the body or treated as 
function of the body. Here we come back to what I said about the 
ambiguities concealed under the idea of my body. As I pointed 
out we have to choose between either treating the body as an 
object amongst other objects or else treating it as the mysterious 
condition of objectivity in general. Inasmuch as I treat my body 
as an object I am forced to deny it any privilege in relation to 
other objects. Only on this condition is it a datum. 


February 1st, 1922 


It seems to me clear that we cannot admit the radical pessimist’s 
claim to penetrate an experience that is not his. We cannot agree 
that his opponent’s resistance to his denials has nothing positive 
about it. Supposing he maintains that he is only being opposed by 
ignorance and half-voluntary lying—systematic blindness about 
the wretchedness that is universal? What does this mean save 
that he is contrasting the state of illusion in which his adversary 
lives with what he views as the veritable state of the universe; 
and that he considers this real state can be recognised by impartial 
inquiry? This is the heart of the question. What we need to know 
is whether the exact value of the world can be the object of an 
enquiry. I note, here, that the idea of ‘exact value’ must have 
reference to the idea of hierarchy and thus of an objective scale. 
The childishness of measuring out doses of pleasure and pain 
as Schopenhauer, Hartmann and their followers did is generally 
recognised. In last analysis pessimism can only be a philosophy 
of deception. It is thus essentially a polemical doctrine (whether 
the pessimist is fighting against himself or against X). It might be 
described as the philosophy of ‘Well, after all, no!’ In the measure 
in which systematic pessimism is confounded with radical atheism, 
as I do not hesitate to think it must be (that is, with the doctrine 
that the soul has no possible recourse or appeal), it can be viewed 
as a refutation of objective or empirical theism which teaches 
that the divine is. Indeed we can conceive of an ascending 
dialectic in which systematic pessimism prepares the way for 
immediate transition to a higher plane. 

I note that I have just expressed myself in terms which fail 
to correspond to my thought. For does it not look as though 
Iam saying that in reality there is appeal (thereby exposing myself 


280 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


to being asked ‘Produce it!’ and thence falling back anew into 
the radical atheist position)? 
This fundamental question needs to be examined again. 


February 2nd, 1922 


Every time I find myself up against the impossibility of affirming 
the existence of the absolute recourse or appeal, I feel the same 
uneasiness. | cannot help asking myself whether I am merely 
dealing with an idea that falls short of existence. The basic 
question remains: how it is possible to conceive a thou which is 
not at the same time a Aim. It is very tempting to view this pure 
thou as a sort of illusory projection which—if I may so express 
it—has nothing to live on. On this point it is indispensable that 
I manage to explain myself; and for that purpose it would be 
impossible to overestimate the importance of what I wrote last 
April. There must be no question of enclosing God within the 
circle of his relations with me. God is such that, taken alone, I do 
not count for him. But here there are difficulties. Am I not in 
practice indirectly restoring to God that very objectivity that 
I considered could never be attributed to him? I have a confused 
feeling that the whole of my philosophy of invocation needs 
widening—that we must break out of the narrow framework in 
which I conceived it at the outset. Yet does not that involve a risk 
that I may deprive myself of the precious advantages that I owe 
to my strict way of stating the initial questions? All this needs a 
thorough examination and must be considered in close association 
with the ideas of object and of existence. 

For more than a year (and in a confused way doubtless for 
much longer) I have been inclined to effect a radical dissociation 
between the ideas of existence and of objectivity. And it may 
well be that it is above all in the light of this that my former 
reflections on the body get their importance. Things exist for me 
in the measure in which I look upon them as prolongations of my 
body. But I only think them as objects in the measure in which 
I adopt the viewpoint of ‘other people’, of ‘somebody or other,’ 
and finally of ‘nobody’. If now I lay claim to eliminate from this 
objective world all that ‘comes from me’ (and the expression is 
as equivocal as it could be) the upshot of it is that there only 
remains a network of abstractions to which, by reason of a sin- 


K* 281 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


gular illusion, I persist in attributing that existence which is 
exclusive of pure objectivity. 

In short, it is necessary to tackle much more vigorously than 
heretofore the idea of a dummy-reality clothed in appearances by 
the subject—who himself is not aware that he is so clothing it. It 
seems to me that there must be a means of confuting once and for 
all the idea of a subject who in some way projects appearances 
on to a colourless and naked reality. 

Thus it seems to me that in the measure in which we define 
objectivity by the universality of certain characteristics that can 
be recognised by any mind in good faith, we are tending to disso- 
ciate objectivity from existence as much as we possibly can or 
we are tending to minimise existence. It is not a question of cutting 
the roots that link objectivity with the basis of pure sensation 
on which it is constituted. Knowledge minimises its object. It 
tends increasingly to reduce it to a totality of formal arrangements 
bearing on pure symbols to which it is only possible to restore a 
content if contact is re-established with an experience which, 
inasmuch as it is experience, escapes from the very conditions of 
intelligibility that knowledge holds to be the only ones that 
are valid. 

But it is obviously here that we should try to elucidate once 
and for all the obscure question of the relations between existence 
and invocation. Here my former reflections ease my task con- 
siderably. To invoke can never be reduced to ‘to think of. 
Something more or something other than an idea is needed here. 
Invocation is only possible if it presupposes the sentiment of 
‘community’ (which is what I should call the ontological founda- 
tion of invocation); yet here there is a difficulty that perhaps I have 
not yet faced up to adequately. ‘It is agreed’, it may be argued, 
‘that invocation supposes this sentiment of community—but this 
sentiment may be an illusion. Your interpretation only has a 
phenomenological value. Nothing guarantees to us that there is a 
real community between the being who invokes and the being 
who is invoked.’ Obviously the objection is worth examining 
closely. 

It seems to me that it could be developed in the following 
way. Either the sentiment of community is fundamentally a belief 
which has an object distinct from itself, an object which is capable 


282 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


of being verified or rejected on empirical grounds; but then we 
ask whether this belief is verified in practice. Or else it suffices 
for itself and does not involve any verification; in which case it is 
an attitude of soul, an interior disposition and hence no onto- 
logical bearing can be ascribed to it. 

A. How could we conceive a way of verifying this com- 
munity which would enable us to establish that it is real? We 
must not overlook the fact that verification always implies the 
idea of a third party (X: it is of the essence of the third party to be 
no matter who) and bears on an object. But here the intervention 
of a third party, of someone who verifies, is unthinkable. At this 
point I come back to the important and profound idea of the 
metaphysical value of the secret (the secret is only conceivable 
in a field in which a fact is modified as soon as it is known—in 
contradistinction to the world of objects where being known 
makes no difference). 

But the difficulty still remains. For I seem perfectly capable 
of being mistaken about the degree of intimacy with another 
being which I have managed to attain. This needs elucidating, 
but it goes to prove that we are dealing here with more than a 
simple impression that is susceptible of being strongly felt (yet 
which falls short of the true and the false). This faith, this ex- 
pectation may be mistaken—but only in the measure in which 
the thou remains a him about whom I reserve for myself the 
possibility of saying: “Wretched fellow, he deceived me, he 
abused my confidence’. The possibility of doubt and, as I should 
express it, of future denunciation is directly bound up with the 
ambiguity of a relation of this kind. Now suppose we imagine 
that this ambiguity disappears, that the thou is only a thou: in that 
measure, doubt and denial become impossible, credit is no longer 
accorded with reservations about verification, it is open and uncon- 
ditional. At this point we can see the indissoluble connection 
between faith and charity. 

B. Hence we seem obliged to conclude that acceptance of the 
second alternative is not bound up with rejection of the first. 

It seems to me that these reflections throw a great deal of 
light on the veritable relation (the word veritable, by the way, is 
as inadequate as it could be) which unites the believer with God; 
yet there is still a danger of viewing this absolute thou as no 


283 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


more than a sort of ideal limit towards which all love tends 
inasmuch as it is purified and filtered, and all elements of egoism 
and disquiet are eliminated from it.t 

This links up, moreover, with what I said about the object 
being a third party in relation to the conversation that I pursue 
with myself. And, strange to observe, I myself become this third 
party whenever I refuse to will, whenever I shrink into a sort of 
fatalism and pessimism regarding myself. (‘I will never be able to 
—he will never be able to, I assure you.’) I (A) hold a conversa- 
tion with myself (B) about myself (C). 

But now a new dilemma appears. Either this absolute thou is 
implied in some way analytically in the finite chou, or else it is 
empirical, but in that case it must be given as a datum: and what 
value can we attribute to a fact of that kind? 

I know that I have come across this dilemma more than 
once already, but I should like to dispose of it once and for 
all. 

It seems that we must reject at the outset the ‘either-or’ of 
the given and the conceived. This becomes quite clear if we 
consider the instance of love, which has no bearing on an idea, 
but even less on an empirical datum. 

The absolute thou cannot be implied in an empirical shou 
because we can only speak of implication as regards character- 
istics, groups of characteristics or universals, and the absolute 
thou is nothing of this kind. As for the second alternative, what 
strikes me as outstanding about it is its extraordinary vagueness. 
Supposing I have met someone who has had a considerable 
influence on me and on my spiritual development. I imagine a 
rationalist would say to me: ‘You cannot base yourself on the 
happy chance from which you have profited. There is nothing 
there that can be made universal because your neighbour has 
not had the same privilege.’ And he will go on to ask: ‘Is the 
discovery of God a-chance benefit of this kind?’ In a word the 
rationalist would like to see all minds in good faith attaining to 
religious certainty by following a prescribed method—while at 
the same time he considers that this is impossible. Thus he sets 


* More emphasis than this should be put on the fact that the he is in some way in 
tension with the me. This is illustrated in familiar experience. For instance the ex- 
perience of a traveller who has to wait at the ticket office while someone else counts 
endless change: ‘But is that man there never going to finish!’ 


284 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


out from the postulate that God should be a truth (i.e. a truth 
as defined for X, for no matter what reflective third person). 
But the answer to this is that we are not concerned with a God 
of that kind. As for my reference to the discovery of God, there 
is need for clarification. We are told: ‘It is immaterial whether 
or not this discovery of God has this or that value for the par- 
ticular individual; the value does not belong to the individual in 
himself, it derives exclusively from the fact that he had such 
and such dispositions, it is due to a fortuitous conjunction. He 
does not look on it as fortuitous, but he is mistaken and it is I 
who am right.’ This is a claim to see through a particular experi- 
ence which the subject who has experienced it is incapable of 
interpreting correctly. 


February 3rd, 1922 


Put shortly, the rationalist argument seems to be as 
follows: 

“You believe that this experience has been ‘“‘sent” you by 
God; but that is a mistake.’ 

In other words the mystic is like the man who believes that a 
favour from which he has benefited was bestowed on him by a 
particular person whom he mistakes. But we must be careful 
here. When I imagine that a present has been given to me by a 
particular person, whereas really that is not the case, my mistake 
can be shown up (either by asking the person in question or by 
making some other inquiry). This obviously cannot happen here, 
for the reason I have already emphasised so often, i.e. that God 
cannot be Aim for me, and no inquiry on his way of behaving is 
possible. But will not my adversary conclude that if inquiry or 
verification is impossible, it is meaningless to say that it is true 
that God has revealed himself to the mystic? And hence are we 
not obliged to confess that we are dealing in mere appearances 
which fall short of the true and the false? I note immediately 
that the word ‘appearances’ is inadequate, because appearances 
only occur where there is reality, they only occur in relation 
to a possible truth. As for this ‘falling short of the true and 
the false’-—why not say ‘beyond the true and the false? What 
meaning can be attached to such pejorative expressions as 
these? 


285 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


The serious objection that I examined at length in 1914 is that 
from this standpoint all experience runs the risk of being viewed 
as transcending the judgments that we claim to bring to bear on it. 
But I feel that I am better equipped than I was to face up to this 
objection. This transcendence can only be stated regarding an 
‘experience’ which is legitimately reflected. Does not supersti- 
tion inevitably convert God into a Aim, so that we are obliged 
to deal with false causal relations? I am inclined to think that all 
mystical ‘experience’ (I dislike this word) is beyond criticism— 
by its very essence it evades the grasp of the person who reflects 
it and thereby falsifies it; and I cannot see how my attitude can 
be condemned. 


July 8th, 1922 

Does the thou exist? It seems to me that the more I establish 
myself on the plane of the zhou, the less the question of existence 
arises; yet is it not possible to fall short of the him, and be in 
a condition of pure infra-existential subjectivity? Actually I 
cannot help treating the ‘fact of being shou’ as the predicate of a 
him. But this could only be so if we needed to accept the Leib- 
nizian either-or of subject or predicate; perhaps substantialism 
is merely the metaphysics of the Aim. Whereas the thou is to 
invocation what the object is to judgment, it cannot be dis- 
entangled from what must be consideied to be its function 
without ceasing to be thou. 

Inasmuch as I regard the thou as a him which is only accident- 
ally thou, I postulate that the conditions that make invocation 
possible reside at one and the same time in Aim and in me. But 
humility consists in concentrating in thee all the reasons (improper 
term) for which thou art thou for me. In this way we exclude belief 
in my merits, or, if I may so express it, in their uplifting value, 
in the part they could play in the success that I am hoping to 
achieve. Thou wilt become more essentially thou for me, inasmuch 
as this idea of success appears less applicable and is less dependent 
on conditions that I have the ‘good fortune’ to attain. In this way 
we can define the possibility of progress in the realm of the zhou; 
but is the absolute zhow which transcends all existential questions 
anything more than an ideal limit? I must delve deeper into the 
meaning of the distinction between a thou which would only be a 


286 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


limit and a chou which would be more than a limit. I cannot say 
that the thou is only a limit without contrasting it with a real thou 
which is thought as imaginary; but to admit that this thou is not 
real, is to transform it into Aim. These abstract reflections seem 
to me extremely important. They cast a sidelight on the whole 
problem of atheism. 


September 29th, 1922 


As I have often said, the object is that which is thought as 
not taking me into account (even idealists recognise that every- 
thing occurs as though the realists were right). But the word me 
here does not mean my body; it is my desire (there is a funda- 
mental agreement between scientific knowledge and an ethical 
system which is essentially stoical). Yet I can constrain things 
to take me-into account in the measure in which I function as 
physical agent. My body is the indispensable mediator by which 
I can act on things, because it itself is homogeneous in relation to 
things. Yet the body itself takes me into account (e.g. an erotic 
image immediately entails a physical modification); in this measure 
it is not objective in the sense defined above. In this sense I 
depend on its interposition; it is in the measure that I depend on it 
that things depend on me; in a word a real potentiality is bound 
up with a ‘non-knowing’; my knowledge is function of something 
which is its very negation. 


September 30th, 1922 


The impossibility of accounting for experience by positing as 
final the distinction between a subject and an object which the 
subject posits to be independent of it; and this situation is not 
bettered by thinking an inze/ligible unity at the heart of which 
this subject and this object posit one another and are face to face. 
Our need is for an irrational unity (a unity, even, that is in some 


way unthinkable). 


October 16th, 1922 
We must ask ourselves what is meant by saying that sensation 
is intelligible. 

Define the realism involved in this common expression ‘T 
really love so-and-so.’ 


287 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


Is my body in the third person for me? 


October 17th, 1922 


These, I think, must be the general lines of my book, at least 
of the introduction: 

1. No inquiry is possible regarding the nature of that which 
is primary in metaphysics. This impossibility is bound up at one 
and the same time with the essence of the inquiry, and with the 
spirit in which it inevitably has to be carried out. The inquirer 
sets himself aside. He effaces himself before the result he obtains. 
What is the result? An answer that is valid for anyone whatsoever. 

2. Get rid of the interpretation which converts metaphysical 
need into a sort of transcendental curiosity. Metaphysical need 
is a kind of appetite—the appetite for being. It aims at the 
possession of being by means of thought. 

3. A mind is metaphysical inasmuch as its position’ in 
relation to the real appears to it to be fundamentally unacceptable. 
Here we must take the word position almost in its physical sense. 
A false position. 

It is a matter of stiffening (establishing) or relaxing perhaps. 
Metaphysics zs this stiffening (redressement) or relaxation. Only 
watch out against metaphors. We are not concerned with stiffen- 
ing or establishing a ‘self’ that is mobile in the midst of a so-called 
immobile world. 

Moreover,the idea of stiffening or ‘redressing’ can be equivocal. 
Are we only concerned with establishing a judgment? Ration- 
alism attributes to philosophy a function of exorcism. This must 
be examined very closely. 


October 18th, 1922 


I need to recall the fact that the cogito only gives us access to a 
world at whose core judgments of existence in the strict sense 
become meaningless. This may perhaps lead back to the ultimate 
phase of Schelling’s philosophy. 


October 24th, 1922 


I have reflected at length on the feeling of inner indigence that 
I am experiencing so cruelly. I still think that at these moments 
1 In this sense Platonism is the essence of philosophy. 


288 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


being reaches its lowest ebb or ceases to offer resistance to itself. 
And this ebbing of the self seems to be bound up with the fact 
that all other persons are treated as others; the thou disappears; 
even the J sees itself as him. And I wonder whether we should not 
see a sort of transposed instinct of preservation in the fact—I have 
often observed it—that when a desire, however feeble, is born 
at such a moment, the whole of the self becomes attached to it. 
The desire, though weak in itself, swells with every breath and 
it is only when the J has once more obtained a grip over itself 
(through conversation, reading, etc.) that the desire is reduced 
to its original volume. A nostalgic state of the soul; it feels itself 
falling below its habitual level. 

May not happiness be a form of self-presence. The more I am 
present to myself, the more others exist for me. This isan example 
of the interior undividedness to which I referred when writing of 
the will—it is that which makes the will possible. To will is to 
succeed in avoiding self-division before performing an action. If, 
before acting, I look on myself in that particular way, my act of 
will is over and done with. The most I will get out of myself will 
be a gesture that is disavowed by all that is deepest in me. 

Is ill-will possible in the metaphysical sense of the word? 
In last analysis I think it is not. Will is in itself a good. An act 
is good inasmuch as it is willed. But are there any external signs 
by which we can know whether an act has been willed or not? 
We are obliged to deny this, I think, without any hesitation. 
And as regards myself, am I absolutely certain that I can state at 
the moment of acting that I will my action? This seems to me 
most uncertain. I must link this up with the problem of repentance. 
I should say (though it needs checking) that a being whose life is 
frittered away in the world of successive events can have no 
infallible consciousness of himself as willing—at least to the 
extent in which his life is thus dissipated. B. was surely right 
when he said that my theory of the will is a central point in my 
philosophy; this also needs very careful re-examination. I need to 
review the part dealing with the will as relaxation, as active 
negation of the 4ut. And the connection that I have pointed out 
this evening between will and one’s own self-presence is also very 
important. Utilise here all that I have said about the tension 
within the Aim. Recapitulate it in a perfectly concrete way. As 


289 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


regards this I also need to look into my question of October 16th: 
Is the body in the third person for me? 


October 25th, 1922 


We may ask whether.the operation of the will is not fundamentally 
bound up with the possession of a sort of grace. At least this con- 
stitutes a very serious difficulty, for it is not possible to see how 
we can depend on the will to‘realise a state which the will pre- 
supposes so as to be able to be exercised. Yet we must take care 
not to get entangled in abstractions and myths. Can I not adopt 
an attitude which is analogous to the attitude of a being who 
wills? And may it not well happen that this attitude is converted 
into reality? 

I take up once more what I wrote several days ago on the sub- 
ject of metaphysical need. For doubtless this is a key. The 
appetite for being is not a desire to acquire qualities nor a desire 
for self-perfection; and this is the fundamental difference between 
the ethical order and the metaphysical order. The metaphysician 
is searching for what is, not what will be (on this point, cf. 
Hegel’s complaint about Fichte). I think I made use of an 
excellent metaphor when I said that the metaphysician is like 
a sick person who is trying to find a ‘position.’ The difficulty 
obviously consists in identifying the centre in relation to which 
this ‘position’ is to be defined. As long as I move amongst objects 
the question does not arise. But in the instance in question, what 
can the unvarying centre be? 

The fundamental datum of all metaphysical reflection is that 
I am a being who is not transparent to himself, that is to say, 
my being is to me a mystery. It is only in moments of interior ebb 
to which I referred yesterday that I cease to apprehend myself 
in this way.! 

This afternoon I was reflecting on the relation between my 
being and my task. Whatever its character, my task does not 
exhaust my being. It does not provide me with a justification of 
myself which can satisfy me totally. It must furthermore be 
1 Tt seems to me that interior indigence always implies the exercise of reflection in the 
void: I am not this particular state, and hence this state is at bottom nothing. But I 
am not anything else either; hence there only zs this particular state which itself is 


nothing. The formula of theoretical despair and pessimism is a forefeeling that there 
is no appeal or recourse. 


290 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


admitted perhaps that I have in me the wherewithal for trans- 
cending all possible justification. Nor can I look on others as 
simple agents, each with his task to accomplish, so that once 
their task is accomplished they have only to disappear. The more | 
a being is thou for me, the less I am tempted to confound him, 
with his task. 

What I have said regarding parts or portions applies almost 
exactly to tasks. I am not qualified to ask myself how the existence 
of others is justified. But it must be noted that it is only inasmuch 
as I try in practice to justify myself that I can become conscious 
of the reality within me which surpasses all justification; this 
reality, does not fall short of my act, it is beyond it. In that way 
we come back to the tragic and Christian view of life. Something 
is endangered from the very beginning of my existence, but this 
something is also capable of being saved, and it only will be on 
condition that it has been saved. This something or this reality 
is only an object of faith: it is my soul. 

Nothing is more radically opposed to the infinite subjectivity 
of post-Kantian philosophers than the idea of a wager and of 
salvation. It is very difficult to define this wager for it is neither 
a timeless value nor a phenomenal content. 

It seems to me, though I may be mistaken, that here we can 
make use of the idea of one’s self-presence that I tried to unravel 
yesterday. We must be very careful to avoid conceiving this idea 
of an internal bond as a logical unity, for that would threaten to 
destroy the living relation between two beings, the community or 
intimacy. If we could conceive the soul as a being married to 
itself (this expression is apparently to be found in Lavelle’s thesis 
but I am not sure in what context) or even as an interior city, 
then ideas such as those of wager, or trial, etc. would attain their 
full meaning. But obviously the critical conception of conscious- 
ness as the unity of the subject and of the object will not help our 
progress in this direction; only if we resolutely turn to ontology 
can we glimpse the possibility of this interpretation. 

(I was wondering this afternoon whether we ought not to 
posit the unity of the will and of inspiration and suppose that 
the difference between them is only phenomenological; that is to 
say that this difference only has bearing on the way in which 
will and inspiration are data given to consciousness.) 


291 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


It might be as well to show why, in concrete experience, the 
idea of consciousness as unity of subject and object is inadequate. 


October 28th, 1922 


I feel that here there is a knot or tangle of thoughts that needs 
to be successfully untied. 

I seem to see at the centre of my metaphysics of spontaneity 
the metaphor of a mobile mirror set against something opaque. 
This mirror habitually reflects objects but owing to its mobility 
it is also able to reflect at least partially that which supports it. 
Thus the knowing subject can in some way become an object for 
himself. As is easy to see this way of representing the subject 
is absurd. To what extent is what I know still myself? What is the 
meaning of the supposition of the majority of philosophers that 
that which knows is identical with that which is known? This 
last postulate is probably connected with the materialistic image 
of a mirror attached to a wall. Here the idea of the body may 
function as principle of identification. 

The idea that only like can know like has certainly played an 
essential part in the history of epistemology since Plato; and 
realism largely consists in a protest against this affirmation. I 
must admit that on this point all my sympathy goes to the realists. 
At the root of the idealist thesis there may be a confusion which 
I have not yet been able to define successfully. 


October 31st, 1922 


I am still thinking about my introduction—it might perhaps 
be called Metaphysics and Reality. Development of my notes of a 
fortnight ago. As an enquiry is impossible, it follows that a 
metaphysical hypothesis is likewise impossible; and this needs 
examining more closely. But why should an enquiry be impos- 
sible? Because it implies the subordination of thought to an object 
of research, that is to say the very attitude from which the meta- 
physician has managed to break away. In a phrase it seems that 
metaphysical uneasiness can be interpreted in terms of the refusal 
to make an abdication, the object being precisely that before 
which I abdicate. 

From this point of view even the idea of a metaphysical 
problem seems rather equivocal. At this point it will be useful to 


292 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


turn back and examine carefully the notion of problem so as to 
see to what extent it has any meaning here. 

But obviously this is only intelligible if we suppose that meta- 
physical inquiry is directed to the pure immediate (which falls 
short of the hypothetical!); irrespective of whether it attains a new 
reality beyond the hypothetical or whether the infra- and supra- 
hypothetical orders meet and are merged together. 

Along such lines we obviously need to re-examine the obscure 
idea of ‘redressment’ or ‘establishment’ that I noted a fortnight 
ago. 


November 2nd, 1922 


Perhaps the best we could do would be to define the nature of 
metaphysical uneasiness? in relation to the problem of time and 
space. Here we come back I think to the reflections I made long 
ago on the strictly contingent character of the here and now with 
which consciousness, when it reflects, appears to itself as bound 
up. If we set out by positing a sort of equivalence of all moments 
of time and of all places in space, I am bound to consider insoluble 
the question of why I am inserted at this point rather than any 
other. My thought, which appears to itself as legitimately com- 
prehending all successions and all spatial simultaneities, revolts 
against recognising that it belongs to a given time and space. 
Perhaps we could set out from here to define ‘redressment’ or 
‘establishment’. Yet I am not sure of this. Our problem in a phrase 
is that of the inadequate relation of the content of the ego to the 
form of the ego—the form is universal, the content particular. 
It is very interesting to note—I think I have already made this 
observation—that it leads us back to my theory of the lot or 
portion, or rather the idea of the practical impossibility of 
separating the person from his lot. Certainly the dualism that 
I have just stated is bound up with the image we form of an 
infinity of réles and the inability to understand why I have been 
allotted one rather than any other. Why am I not a Russian 
musician, a Portuguese usurer, or a negro from Lake Tchad? 


1 Show the intimate bond between the notions of object and hypothesis. On this point 
Alain is quite simply right. : 

2 At all events it is important to show at the outset that metaphysics always claims 
to be the satisfaction of an uneasiness, whereas scientific knowledge is quite different 
and there is no such thing as scientific uneasiness. 


293 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


In other words I end up with a datum that cannot be reduced. 

To express it briefly, it is meaningless to treat the spatial 
and temporal qualifications of my experience as a distinct fact into 
the cause of which we can probe. Yet this is not absolutely clear. 


November 3rd, 1922 


In the Exposé du Véritable Empirisme de Schelling | came across 
the profound observation that the philosopher’s first task is to 
define the true fact (die wahre Tatsache) and that nothing could 
be less immediate than this. From my standpoint, this point is 
cardinal. The idea of ‘redressment’ ‘establishment’ round which 
my reflections have been gravitating for some time is obviously 
an effort to substitute an authentic fact for the appearance of a 
fact. Yesterday I was wondering up to what point it is possible 
to deny experience. Denial here would mean rejection. In this 
sense certain dreams can be denied or rejected. They can be 
effaced. May our experience not be to reality what dreams are 
to our experience? The impossibility of treating my experience 
as a ground-plot or as an absolute landmark. This is very impor- 
tant. Am I not able with certainty to discriminate within the 
heart of my experience, between what matters, what has an 
interior echo, and what is insignificant? We need to react whole- 
heartedly against the tendency to think that the fact that a thing 
‘takes place’ confers reality on it. 

One objection is obvious. Such discrimination—which can 
only be an evaluation—is purely subjective. We need to reflect 
on the real bearing of this objection, on the postulate that what 
happens (inasmuch as happening) has a sort of reality that is 
fundamental and universal and in opposition to the contingent 
evaluations to which we would submit it. Show that this postulate 
is bound up with a causal representation of phenomena, a chain 
whose links are homogeneous in relation to one another. Here we 
have statements that stand together. 


November 4th, 1922 


Once more I feel constrained to reflect on what ‘to happen’ 
means. Factual realism is not a tenable position. The fact is no 
more than a particular construction built on the foundation of the 
datum. It extends on all sides beyond the limits that we arbitrarily 


294 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


assign to it (this can be shown if we take as example my meeting 
with someone, which is destined to have distant repercussions. 
The encounter itself only consists in a moment of proximity. 
As usual we will treat as a fact what in reality is a complex). 
It would be a complete illusion to believe that this construction 
is less real than the data on which it is built. Moreover, it is 
important to notice that by a further illusion we extrapolate the 
- judgment of reality by bringing it to bear on what falls short of 
strictly objective experience. This is rather important. Is there 
no means of establishing that at the root of this belief in things 
‘which happen’ there lies a whole system of metaphors by which 
we are taken in and duped—and that it is the business of meta- 
physical reflection to deliver us from these metaphors? But that 
should be done without getting lost in an abstract philosophy. 


February 20th, 1923 


I think that the Christian idea of the infinite value of souls 
is fundamentally no more than the negation of the belief in a price, 
in a tariff-rate that can be applied to persons. Of course we admit 
quite spontaneously that a person has no commercial value (even 
when we transpose the meaning of those words), but we do not 
see clearly all that this implies. If persons themselves have no value 
what is valuable in them? Is it their qualities? 


February 21st, 1923 


As soon as we think of ‘merits’ we posit that they can be in some 
way priced. But these merits are thought to be merits of some 
particular person, and it is here that the uncertainties begin; how 
are we to conceive the mherence of merit in the person? What 
further complicates the question is the obscure idea of a merit 
as a quality that the subject confers on himself (this is a flagrantly 
vicious circle, since merit consists less in the results of effort than 
in effort itself). We must recognise the inconsistency that lies 
in the phrase ‘it all depends on you . . . ’, or if we wish it to 
have a meaning we should at least provide a coherent definition 
of the relation which unites a person and his qualities. 


February 23rd, 1923 
Once again I feel like someone who is vainly trying to open a 
295 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


door, or even like someone trying to discover what door to open. 
Have I been abusing such formulae as: ‘I am a being to whom 
his being itself appears as a mystery’? Is there not a risk that the 
idea of mystery, like that of the zhou, will become a stop-gap? The 
distinction between problem and mystery needs more elucidation 
than I have provided. In my notes of January 1919 I am afraid I 
went too far in sacrificing the notion of divine transcendence. 


February 26th, 1923 


The fundamental objection that my work may have to face 
could be formulated as follows: ‘You struggle to find in the very 
structure of the real a justification for particular proceedings in 
human thought. But are you sure that your attitude is legitimate? 
May it not well be that these proceedings are explained by practical 
conditions (of psychology, sociology, etc.) to which the human 
being is submitted?’ 

This objection presupposes that there is a radical distinction 
between the strict facts of experience and what is only a simple 
state of mind, a subjective ‘disposition.’ As scientific knowledge 
is able to get a grip on certain strata of the real, it is legitimate to 
ask what assures it its power of apprehension and its validity. In 
other words, the critical problem is only stated within the limits 
of what is recognised as objective.t But how find common ground 
between prayer, for instance, and some experimental operation 
whose effects we try to make intelligible? 

ane would have to begin by establishing that prayer can be 
useful. 

Unfortunately, were we able to make a list of efficacious 
prayers and prayers said in vain, were it possible to determine in 
a Statistical way the cases in which praying would be worth while 
and those in which ‘it would be wasting time,’ that would be the 
end of prayer as prayer. Belief in prayer implies the absolute 
negation of any such experiment. Were I to say: ‘In this case 
it would be a waste of time’ I would immediately be taking my. 
stand outside the sphere of religious life. And this would also 
apply were I to adopt the attitude of a sick man who in despair 
sends for a charlatan on the grounds that nothing is lost by trying 
and that ‘anyway there is a chance that it might work.’ The sick 


1] have in mind the disciples of Hume for whom epistemology is impossible in itself. 


296 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


man in question wagers on ignorance regarding the terms of life 
and death and says to himself that after all the charlatan ‘may do 
the trick.’ In a word he is dominated by the idea of ‘groping his 
way’ through. Everybody ‘gropes his way’ and there is no reason 
why the charlatan should not be ‘luckier’ than some high priest of 
the medical world. As is easy to see, this sceptical way of reason- 
ing really implies belief in the possibility of a rational technique 
to which mankind has not yet attained. When a sick man has 
lost all confidence in medicine he may think of religion as a 
means of getting out of the difficulty ‘in case there is another 
world’: religion considered as a system of precautions that it is 
better not to neglect, in case . . . etc. Against any such con- 
ception as this the objection I mentioned above certainly has its 
point. If religious practices are conceived of as means that permit 
the realisation of certain ends, the first question that obviously 
arises is whether they are really efficacious means. In a similar 
way it is only possible to ask about the metaphysical foundations 
for magic if magic is objective, i.e. if there is a magical experience. 
I note by the way that it is impossible to determine a priori what 
are or ought to be the characteristics of this experience; and fur- 
thermore that even if there is such a thing as a technique of magic, 
it is by no means certain that that technique can be interpreted or 
defined in logical terms. It may well be that the personality of the 
magician, or the powers of which he is possibly the agent, operate 
according to modalities whose conceptual equivalent we are in no 
position to discover. It goes without saying, moreover, that if 
there is no such thing as magical experience we have no ground 
for asking any questions about it save how the belief in magical 
experience has actually been able to develop. 

In other words are we obliged to admit the following 
dilemma?— 

Either there is such a thing as religious experience, and hence 
it is legitimate to ask how it is possible; but it is to be feared that 
this experience is only the sublimation of magical experience, 
and it is at the least doubtful whether on this ground the fun- 
damental religious values can be safeguarded. 

Or else we must agree that there is no such thing as religious 
experience; we remain in the order of as if, in the sphere of states 
of mind; supposing that spiritual values can be maintained from 


297 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


that standpoint, we must resign ourselves to viewing these values 
as no more than ideal expressions of personal life understood ina 
narrowly subjective way. 

All my efforts are aimed at the rejection of this dilemma. 
But the problem still stands: are there grounds for supposing that 
my work only consists in rationalising contingent data that I find 
‘in myself?’ This question in its turn presupposes the either-or of 
factual data or universal data. But what is their opposition worth? 

To continue. Supposing that I recognise in myself the idea, 
the need of an absolute appeal or recourse. I will inevitably be 
asked whether I think of this idea or need as bound up with the 
nature of consciousness in general. Indeed we are always falling 
back on to the Uberhaupt. But even if we admit that this question 
has a meaning, why attribute ontological pre-eminence to such 
Voraussetzungen? Upon reflection do we not find that what really 
happens is that we transpose into another domain habits of 
thought borrowed from daily life, in which we are obliged to 
write out reports . . . the contracting parties agreeing to recog- 
nise, etc? But when we pass from this sphere into the sphere of 
theoretical knowledge have we any justification for the idea that 
the chances of error are greater from the moment at which we are 
no longer in agreement? If we do so it is because at bottom we are 
obsessed with the idea of perception as opposed to hallucination 
(e.g. the report of a psychical séance which on principle only 
retains that which all the spectators have seen). But if we take our 
stand on mspiration the problem changes its aspect. 

It must never be forgotten that if the superiority of scientific 
knowledge consists in the fact that it is for everybody,! that 
superiority is bought at a very high metaphysical price. Scienti- 
fic knowledge is only for everybody because it is, strictly speaking, 
for nobody. 

There is a radical opposition between my knowledge—which 
is by essence capable of being transmitted, capable of being 
detached from the particular context in which it is involved—and 
a special experience of sentiment which is by essence incapable of 
transmission. What are we to say regarding the latter? 


* Moreover we need to inquire whether a minute examination of the conditions of 
scientific investigation would not cause this impressive universality partially to vanish. 
All that can be said is that the result here obtains universally. 


298 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


At first sight goods that cannot be transmitted seem so 
heterogeneous in comparison with communicable goods that the 
mind revolts at comparing one with the other. On the one side 
there are ‘truths’ and references, on the other a kind of data about 
whose nature it is not easy tomake a statement. About some 
particular person I have a collection of information that I can 
convey to whomsoever I like because it is not attached to me. On 
the other hand, in relation to that person, I occupy a peculiar 
position that is not strictly definable—it is less definable the more 
essentially it is bound up with what I am. Of course I can say ‘I 
am the friend of so-and-so,’ that is to say I can express this relation 
under a universal form that is capable of being transmitted—but 
to this extent I take my stand apart from ‘us’. Yet a metaphysics 
of the true can scarcely go beyond the schematic formula: Peter 
and Paul are friends.1 


February 27th, 1923 

It is impossible to reflect on myself without becoming aware 
of these goods that are not transmissible. It is also impossible 
to make out a list of them and range them next to one another; it 
is as though they permeated one another. The house in which I 
have lived with the people that I love is, so to speak, impregnated 
with the very quality of that affection. If this quality is not 
me, at least it cannot in any way be dissociated from me. Can it 
be converted into a ‘content of thought?’ No, I think it is, strictly 
speaking, inexpressible. We can only allude to it. If it can be 
sensed it is only by a sort of magic analogous to the magic of 
the poet and the musician. A magic to which some people may be 
obtuse. 

Here we are very close to concrete experience, very far from 
‘rational thought.’ And, in reality,are we not in some way tending 
towards a rehabilitation of the substantial forms? Is there not a 
danger of setting up beyond this phantom world of qualities, a 
pseudo-physics of ‘fluids’ that strengthen one another or work 
against one another. ‘Quality’ is then treated as a force—an 
objective entity. ... 


1 Yet does not analysis as practised by Proust manage to individualise a relation of 
this type in an almost infinite measure? We would have to see whether it does not 
betray the relation when it ‘details’ it. I do not know. 


ae 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


I feel strongly that this quality cannot be treated as a predicate 
and that it is bound up with existence itself. Is not my relation 
to my body (of course the word ‘relation’ is wrong) essentially 
another possession that cannot be transmitted? 

The fundamental difficulty still remains. If I speak of this 
unthinkable quality, I must in some way think it. 


February 28th, 1923 
A thought occurred to me yesterday that may dispel this difficulty 


at least in part. The mind is constantly confronting a determined 
idea with a mass of experience which is given to it as datum, but 
not under the form of idea: as for instance when, after reflection, 
I refer to someone and say ‘he is no good’ or ‘he is intelligent.’ 
How is such confrontation possible? Am I unable to imagine an 
experience that can be expressed correctly by the words good or 
intelligent? I feel my real experience to be either distinct or not 
distinct from this imagined experience. If that is the case the word 
(or idea) only serves to mediate between two experiences one of 
which is given as datum and the other imagined. Are we therefore 
obliged to suppose that this quality can be compared to a kind 
of ‘mass’ or ‘quantum’ that is not conceptualised? I hesitate to say 
that. 

The example of charm occurs to my mind. Charm is surely 
a quality of this order, a quality immediately felt when it imposes 
itself on me. I note that we have no charm for ourselves, and that 
there is a tendency for charm to vanish when I, who am subjected 
to it, find out that the person who is employing his charm is 
aware that he is doing so. 

Charm appears to decline with the decline of the gratuitous 
element in behaviour, or when a person’s attention is more and 
more taken up with precise and specifiable ends. Thus, generally 
speaking, a man has less charm than a woman or a child. When J. 
talks of children that are lacking in charm he often says that 
they are ‘too precise’ and this well expresses the absence of a ‘halo’ 
round their acts and words. Nothing is less susceptible of being 


acquired than charm.! A manifestation of the will can exclude 
* Charm could even be contrasted with life, in that life is acquisition and consumption. 
If we adopt this standpoint do we not get a glimpse of new categories? The possi- 


bility of a contrast between existence in the strict sense, and life (cf. the note of 
March tst., 1923). But this is very vague. 


300 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


charm radically: the manifestation of will that implies a tension. 
Charm is as it were the presence of the person round what he 
does and what he says. 

An infant has not yet developed charm. Charm only appears 

where we are directly aware of the margin that separates a person 
from what he does. It is a ‘beyond’; and hence it has no ethical 
equivalent. A person only has charm if he is ‘beyond’ his vir- 
tues if they appear to emanate from a distant and unknown 
source. 
We can only experience charm as regards individuals as such. 
But by very essence it can be mistaken or ignored. The absurdity 
of an inquiry into charm. Considered as an element in a sketch or 
description the statement that “X has (or had) charm’ is self- 
destructive.t 

Iam fully aware that this contrast between presence and action 
is enormously important. It is a key. 

Could there be such a thing as negative charm, an antipathy 
experienced positively, a repulsion whose basis lies in being itself? 
I cannot help thinking so. But I do not think that a person who 
has charm for some people can be an object of repulsion for others, 
unless this be in a moral sense. 

The incompatibility of charm and of indiscretion, of over- 
flowing joy: the soul becomes less present as soon as it is pro- 
jected. 


March ist, 1923 


Is charm more than mere appearance? 

Here we need to grasp that the reality zs the appearance. 
Charm cannot be dissociated from the act of charming. It would 
be disastrous to view it as the revelation of some particular 
quality that can be conceptualised. 

I am being bold in attempting to link up charm with all that 
is most metaphysical in the personality, with the quality which is 
irreducible and incapable of being objectivised—the quality which 
is doubtless only another facet of what we call existence. What 
happens to this quality in a person who lacks charm? I have a 
confused feeling that that question is meaningless. Fundamentally 


1It would be grotesque, for instance, to insert this statement into a funeral 
notice. 


301 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


we liken this quality to a brace or a spring—but that is exactly 
how we should not conceive of it. This brace could only be a 
logical minimum of conditions, a rudiment of conception. As long 
as I limit myself to proceeding by means of inferences, to saying, 
for instance: ‘Under some form or other X must also have what in 
Y is revealed to me as charm,’ I am still only dealing with words. 
Whereas in reality here we can only have to do with direct ex- 
perience, with revelation. Doubtless I can perfectly well say that 
everyone is capable, for a short moment, of grasping himself or 
experiencing himself as transcending his own description. But when 
I say this 1am mainly making an act of faith. For I myself only be- 
come a complete individual through the infinite credit which I 
grant to other individuals. 

Approximation of existence and value: there is infinite value 
in the fact of feeling another to be present, an infinite value in 
contact as such. 

This word ‘presence’ seems to me much less deceptive than 
the word ‘quality’. It is the conjuring of the imagination that 
causes my almost invincible tendency to treat as a quality, then 
as a predicate, what in reality is only a way in which the other is 
given to me myself. Here there is a sort of labyrinth of thought. 
For how can I fail to endeavour to attach to a special quality of the 
other the privileged experience I have of him? Only we do not 
profit by this procedure; we even run the risk in the end of dis- 
torting the experience itself. These reflections throw a sidelight 
on the theory of the thou. Note what is gratuitous and unexplain- 
able in this experience. For instance to ask about the conditions 
under which a he can become a thou would be contradictory. Show 
also the irreducible difference between presence and objectivity. 
At this point I come back to my notes on interior indigence, the 
feeling of an absence or rather of a non-presence. The ground 
ceases to echo beneath my feet. The world becomes thin and trans- 
parent. There is no more resistance, no more elasticity. I do 
not even set up resistance to myself, I no longer expect anything 
either from myself or from events. Boredom bound up, if I am not 
putting it too boldly, with a kind of pejorative awareness of 
intelligibility, of the ‘of course’. 

But if we substitute presence for quality, is there not a risk 
of ending up with the purely subjectivist notion of the feeling of 


302 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


‘presence’? Here, again, I think we are in danger of being intimi- 
dated by fictitious dilemmas. 


March 2nd, 1923 


When we contrast the person himself with the attitude adopted 
regarding him, we represent this person to ourselves as a sort of 
object in face of which we ought to adopt a particular position. 
But the individual cannot strictly be compared with something 
that is capable of appearing in variable and complementary pers- 
pectives. The more a being becomes real for us and present to 
us, the less we think we can see all round him. It is only then 
that the infinite, which is enfolded in all spiritual reality, is 
revealed to us—though most of the time we argue about this 
infinite without believing in it. If this be so, we avoid the danger 
of subjectivism for there can no longer be any question of con- 
trasting the invariable and global reality of the being-object and 
the contingent attitudes adopted by a mobile intelligence with 
regard to it. For this revelation to be possible, a certain internal 
agreement must be established between the two beings. The part 
played by maturity or ripeness. In the objective order there is no 
more place for revelation than there is for mystery: these two 
notions are complementary. 


March 5th, 1923 
As outcome of a conversation with B. I am obliged to admit 
that it is absurd to speak of the ‘thou’ and thus to consider as a 
substantive what at bottom is the very negation of all substantial- 
ity. In reality, once I have singled it out, I objectivise a particular 
aspect of the experience of intimacy. From the core of the us I 
subtract the element that is noz-me and call it thou. This element 
has an automatic tendency to take on the character of the Aim. 
And it is only in the measure in which I succeed in re-living this 
experience of intimacy after the event that I am able to resist 
this temptation. But can I ask myself questions about the immuta- 
bility of this ‘thou’ without converting it into Aim? ‘Tt is always 
the same!’ Does not this spontaneous exclamation imply the rup- 
ture of intimacy, the escape from the ws? 

Hence we are led to ask whether intimacy does not invariably 
consist in breaking through the outer bark of personality, and 


393 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


whether it does not involve participation in a vaster life at the 
heart of which certain distinctions are abolished. Are we to 
suppose that the people whom we call our friends have the func- 
tion or the privilege of liberating us in some way from our 
personality? When we love someone, do we elevate ourselves 
to a plane on which it is no longer ‘somebody’ that we love? 
For myself I am loath to accept this interpretation, for it deper- 
sonalises love and drowns it in the indeterminate. 

. . « The further I proceed the more I am struck by the fact that 
epistemological preoccupations tend to put our minds in a state 
in which we can never resolve or even state the problem of love. 
For the theory of knowledge has the essential task of at one and 
the same time defining objectivity and finding a basis for it. 
It gravitates round the idea of the object, hence it postulates that 
it is at least possible for the subject to disentangle from the heart 
of his concrete experience everything that involves no personal 
contribution on his part; and this though it sets aside the meta- 
physical question of how an object can be present to a subject. 
The subject-object relation is presupposed in any epistemology 
whatsoever. But if this postulate be maintained, love is almost 
bound to appear to be a particular contingent attitude adopted 
by the subject regarding the object. But this does not resolve 
the real problem, it eludes it—for the real problem precisely 
consists in finding out how love can be referred to an individual 
being, and whether it is impossible in practice for a real link to be 
established between true love and the beloved. The impossibility 
of this could only be demonstrated on condition that it were not 
presupposed—and in this instance it plainly is presupposed. 

The difficulty is increased by the fact that the reality of a 
fusion of feeling seems incapable of being established empirically, 
at least if we suppose that the only experience that is possible for 
me is the experience of myself, of my ‘states’; in a word, that I 
can only grasp the object on condition that the object in some way 
becomes myself. But supposing it be maintained that reality and 
reciprocity are distinct characteristics and that a feeling should 
be capable of being real without therefore possessing a sort of 
transcendent with regard to those who experience it? But in 
that case how are we to distinguish between the real feeling 
and the feeling that is not real? Are we obliged to say that 


304 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


in this field to be real means to be experienced—and only that? 
Yet we all admit that we may be misled about what we 
experience. Hence there is a big problem here. 


March 6th, 1923 


Why do we take the fact that we are able to be misled regarding 
our own organic condition so for granted? We get the impression 
that something happens within our organism other than what 
we think. The image, fundamentally visual, that we form of real- 
ity allows us to distinguish clearly between what is real and what 
is merely appearance. Then we say that what really happens is 
what an observer provided with suitable instruments would be 
able to observe. The same cannot be said regarding feelings. We 
do not imagine what really happens. The real happening cannot be 
represented, we do not think that it can be noted by an observer 
however well equipped he may be. But we must tackle the 
postulate itself boldly: (a) Are we to say that only that which 
can be inscribed on a retina really happens? As I admit that there is 
at least one psychological becoming, I do not think so. Must we 
then fall back on to the statement (b) that there is no definable 
difference between what is apparent and what is real, save in the 
measure in which reflection is brought to bear on events that in- 
volve representation? (or, again, in the measure in which the 
idea of an absolute observer can legitimately be brought in). But 
it is easy to see that the idea of an absolute observer involves a 
complete contradiction. The word observer implies the idea of a 
standpoint or perspective. It is of the essence of an event that it 
is capable of representation, that it should be able to be repre- 
sented in infinitely variable perspectives, and in foreshortenings 
that can be infinitely graded. Every observation is a particular 
aspect or a particular succession of aspects of something that can- 
not avoid being thought as irreducibly heterogeneous in relation 
to these aspects themselves. None of these aspects can be called 
absolute. The most detailed of them is not necessarily the truest 
(with an impressionist painting, for instance, detail should not 
be perceived as detail). But the statement (b) can only be main- 
tained if it is legitimate to admit the idea of an absolute re- 
presentation. Were we to suppose that the proposition (b) is true 
we would need to conclude that the distinction between appear- 


L 305 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


ance and reality is itself dependent on an arbitrary (and fundamen- 
tally contradictory) decree of the mind. Hence we conclude that: 

Either there is no absolute meaning in speaking of what really 
happens or in contrasting the real happening with the apparent 
happening, 

Or edse that if this formula has a meaning it cannot be regarded 
as indicating a succession of events to which a spatial representa- 
tion can be attributed. 


March 7th, 1923 

We seem to be ending up by completely reversing our spon- 
taneous conceptions about the relations between appearance and 
reality. If there is a real invariant in function of which the inter- 
pretations can be considered incorrect, it does not seem as if we 
can look on this invariant as capable of being represented; the 
invariant is rather of the order of sentiment or feeling which we 
can only transpose (roughly) into images. It is worth inquiring 
whether this does not cast light on the relations of the thou and 
the he. The question of whether it is possible to view this invariant 
as an event is secondary. 

In other words, realism would only be justified as regards feel- 
ing. Feeling alone could be treated as global reality, as reality which 
transcends the relative interpretations to which it gives birth. 

It must be admitted that this brings us face to face with a 
singularly embarrassing question. How can a feeling be brought 
into confrontation with an idea of this feeling? Only, I think, on 
condition that this idea operates as a suggestive power and makes 
us experience at least a shadow of the feeling that it claims to indi- 
cate. The meaning of this can be explained by very simple 
examples. Somebody asks me: ‘Are you hungry?’ I answer, ‘No.’ 
My coenesthetic ‘state’ rejects the qualification ‘hunger’, but that is 
only because the word ‘hunger’ suggests to me, however ob- 
scurely, a state which does not coincide with what I actually 
experience. It is infinitely more difficult (and perhaps not legiti- 
mately possible) to answer the question: ‘Do you love him?’ 
because here the word ‘love’ fails completely to evoke a simple 
and clearly grasped ‘state’ with which we can contrast the state 
we have experienced. This is doubtless the reason why we can 
be misled regarding what we experience. The error, in a word, 


306 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


consists in qualifying improperly. And this error of qualification 
depends on the fact that we construct a schematic idea out of a 
feeling. The more complex the feeling is, the more such errors in 
qualification are possible. 

But is this after all more than a mere question of names, of 
words? Consider this example. I think I am experiencing for X 
a disinterested aversion, whereas in reality I envy him. I am 
deceiving myself about the real character of this feeling. What 
must we understand by that? 

As soon as I begin interpreting or qualifying a way of feeling, 
[adopt a dialectical attitude towards it and I cease to experience it 
in the pure and simple sense. In the place of the feeling I substi- 
tute a particular idea of the feeling—a schema. But this brings us 
back to the question: how can one idea of the feeling be more 
exact than another? What occurs has the appearance of a reference 
to a catalogue or keyboard of feelings. 


March 8th, 1923 


All this is equivocal because we are inadequately aware of what 
the idea of feeling is, we are not even sure that such an idea is 
possible. It seems to me that the analogy between feeling and ill- 
ness can be pushed quite far, and that the same conditions govern 
the diagnosis of both. This diagnostic supposes that the symptoms 
are defined. It is only thanks to such corroboration that recog- 
nition, i.e. subsumption, is possible. But the difficulty is not yet 
completely resolved. When we say subsumption we also mean 
concept. I am unable to say to my friend: “What you experience 
for that person is not, as you imagine, respectful friendship or 
disinterested curiosity; it is love,’ unless there is a certain univer- 
sal idea of love. I may be told that this is not an idea but an 
experience. But that distinction is irrelevant. Experience functions 
as idea as soon as it is freed from the particular context that makes 
it ‘mine.’ 

But these remarks are not enough to eliminate completely the 
idea of a ‘keyboard of feelings.’ For it may still happen that I 
qualify improperly the way in which I feel, and baptise with the 
name love what is only solid affection; and it is even a@ priori 
impossible to conceive what the conditions or the guarantees of 
infallibility in such a matter could very well be. Now to describe 


307 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


something as ‘improper’ only has a meaning if we suppose some- 
one ‘competent’ who, when he experiences the same feeling as I 
myself experience, calls it by another name. What is competence 
save the fact of having possession of a collection of experiences 
with the respective designations that fit each of them? Now if we 
declare that the idea of a competent judge who puts himself in my 
place and experiences what I experience is contradictory, we are 
left with the conclusion that in such matters as this no mistake in 
designation is possible and any kind of feeling can be called by 
any kind of name. But this hypothesis is self-contradictory because 
a name is a means of communication (of making common). ‘Thus 
we need to go further and maintain that feelings cannot be ex- 
pressed in words and cannot legitimately serve as material for 
discourse. Discourse on feelings! is only possible if we postulate 
that these feelings are at least relatively independent of the subjects 
who experience them, and if we suppose that a feeling preserves 
its nature even when disengaged from its individual content. 
it may well be that the idea.of a feeling is only the liberated 
feeling itself and in that case the question of how the sentiment 
thus liberated presents itself to consciousness would only consti- 
tute a secondary psychological problem. Yet we need to recognise 
that the more we make discourse on feelings which are closely 
bound up to the subject, the more it becomes difficult to know 
what we are talking about, and the consequences of this are surely 
important. 

What are we to conclude as regards the problem that I have 
been examining during these last few days (the distinction between 
what I feel and what I think I feel)? What is the exact difference 
between my interpretation and the interpretation that the com- 
petent subject would give? I think we must take it that, as regards 
the feeling in question, the competent subject would adopt a 
position that differs from mine because of its disinterestedness. 
It may be that all mistakes in this field are dependent on the 
subject’s interest in committing them. This would take us back 
to Freud. 

Ought we to say that as soon as we succeed in thinking our 
feeling, that is to say, in treating it as noz-ours, in disinteresting 


Similarly pathology is only possible in the measure in which there are not only sick 
people, but that there are illnesses, 


308 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


ourselves from it, we grasp it in its truth? And on the other 
hand is the fact that this feeling is independent of the subject 
(the condition of its being thought) bound up with what B. calls 
his reality? It is very important to examine this. 

Furthermore, we must be careful about the ambiguity of the 
word ‘independence.’ Independence can be defined either with 
reference to the subject himself or with reference to his individual 
characteristics. It seems to me that we should only retain the 
second of these definitions here. 

It follows that independence should not be confounded with 
transcendence. Can we proceed any further in this direction and 
say that a feeling is the more real the less it can be converted into 
its own idea and removed from its own context? I do not think 
this is true. There is no doubting that Romeo’s love for Juliet 
appears to him as Jove. What is true is that the real feeling is pre- 
sented as essentially new and without precedent and as incapable 
of being reduced to any former experience and integrated in it. 


March 9th, 1923 

Actually I wonder whether I am not wrestling with a common- 
place. To identify a feeling we must have experienced it, if not 
directly and spontaneously, at least in imagination. Yet, as I have 
already said, the fact remains that this identification can only be 
effected by means of a diagnosis of the symptoms. Supposing that 
a pure feeling were capable of existing, which is highly doubtful, | 
cannot see how it could be grasped and identified. Yet this needs 
to be examined more closely—and it is not certain that the 
question is very interesting. 

What is certain is that identification (and definition) are only 
possible in the measure in which a feeling is something that we 
have as we have a cold or measles. Hence I am led to the opinion 
that there must be a depth of affectivity within us which it is not 
possible for us to identify and hence define conceptually, still 
less to set face to face with ourselves and deal with objectively. 
It is not easy to see how feeling can fail to be in some way woven 
into an affective material from whose woof it then stands out. 
But this woof in a sense must be identified with myself? and the 


1 To use other terms we could compare this fundamental feeling to an axis of reference 
which itself cannot be referred to anything. Perhaps this should be examined again. 


a7 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


idea of it therefore cannot exist. Or at least the possibility of 
forming an idea of it is bound up with a capacity for interior 
displacement and, so to speak, of metamorphosis which is not at 
all common. Here I am thinking of Proust in whom the two 
gifts are so obviously bound together. 

Are we not obliged to think that the more we succeed in 
converting feelings into ideas, that is to say in treating feelings 
as generic ‘affectivities’-—but ‘affectivities’ that are not dependent 
on what is most individual in our essence—the more it becomes 
legitimate to consider them as unreal and as non-transcendental. 
In other words it might well be that reflection has the power 
of accomplishing on feelings an operation that is strictly destruc- 
tive. It could truly be said that the more reflection is exercised 
the more the subjectivist affirmation (which lies at the foundation 
of all epistemology) tends to confer on itself its own justification, 
What I mean is this: the relative independence of the feeling in 
relation to the subject who experiences it can only be an object 
of thought for the subject; the subject only identifies it if within 
himself he adopts an attitude of exteriority towards the feelings. 
But inasmuch as he adopts this attitude does he not by that very 
fact remove from the feelings in question their initial transcen- 
dence? For it must not be forgotten that we are unable to view a 
feeling (or @ fortiori the bond which unites this feeling to the 
personality) as entirely independent of the manner in which the 
feeling in question is envisaged by the subject. It is impossible to 
look on feeling as ‘taking no account’ of the judgment brought 
to bear on it by the subject.t What, then, can we disentangle from 
these meandering reflections? Do they enable us to answer the 
original question of how it is possible for me to be mistaken 
about my feelings? I think they do. We must answer that mis- 
takes on the nature of a feeling are possible in the measure in 
which we suppose that there are ideas of feelings, that is to say 
that a feeling can be treated without appreciable alteration as 
something that we ave, that I have, for instance, but that some- 
body else could have just as I do. From this standpoint there is 
On the other hand I wonder whether the subject is not a complete fiction that we set 
up in the measure in which we treat feelings as things that ‘we have’, that ‘somebody 
has’. This would explain why it is impossible to conceive a relation between the 


personality and a feeling that could be considered to be really fundamental (stofflich); 
to be what I have called the Urgefiihl. 


310 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


nothing contradictory about thought substituting for myself 
another subject who experiences the same feeling as I do and who 
is better able to recognise its nature (e.g. there is no essential 
difference between a feeling and a scent, that some other person 
might be better able to identify than myself). This point seems to 
me established beyond all discussion. On the other hand the ques- 
tion of what we should think of the reality of a feeling conceived 
in this way is still very obscure. The hypothesis I adopted this 
morning can be formulated as follows: As soon as I distinguish 
myself from my feelings, as soon as I think myself as someone 
who fas these feelings, I immediately deprive these feelings of all 
ontological value. They are only ‘related’ to objects as perceptions 
are related. In short, this ontological character only belongs to an 
indivisible experience that is rent and mutilated by reflection. 


March 16th, 1923 


Fundamentally the whole problem comes back to the distinction 
between what we have and what we are. It is extraordinarily _ 
difficult to express this in a conceptual form, yet it should be 
possible. What we have evidently has a kind of exteriority as 
regards the self. Yet this exteriority is not absolute. In principle 
what one has are things (or what can be compared with things in 
the extent to which such comparison is possible. Strictly speaking, 
I can only have something whose existence is up to a certain 
point independent of me. In other words what I have is added 
to me; furthermore the fact of being possessed by me is added 
to other properties, qualities, etc. that belong to the thing I have. 
I only Aave that which I in some way and within certain limits 
have at my disposal, or to put it in other words, inasmuch as I 
can be considered as a potentiality, as a being endowed with 
potentiality. We can only transmit what we have. If it happens 
that a potentiality is capable of being transmitted, we are driven to 
conclude that that potentiality is in practically the same relation to 
a more substantial ego as my pen (the pen I Aave) is in to that po- 
tentiality. If the category of being is really valid it is because that 
which is not capable of being transmitted is to be found in reality. 


May 3rd, 1923 
I have been re-reading the note I made on March 16th. The idea » 


311 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


I expressed then scarcely seems open to criticism as such. But 
it is now time to ask whether it is possible for what cannot be 
transmitted to be individual. The question is of fundamental 
importance yet it is not easy to state it in clear terms. lt seems 
to me certain that were we to succeed in elucidating the extremely 
confused notions that are here tangled together, we would also be 
successful if not in resolving problems such as that of the psycho- 
logy of heredity, at least in discovering the extent to which their 
solution must be experimental—and that would already be no 
mean achievement. 

One point is of primary importance at the outset. Are we 
capable of conceiving of a transmission being made without the 
use of a material vehicle? (It is plain that when we speak of 
hereditary psychology we conceive or imagine more or less 
explicitly some material basis for the qualities transmitted.) Now 
in last analysis it seems to me certain that it is not legitimate to 
do this, and that the case of the transmission of a message which 
involves an emission at the point of departure and its reception 
at the point of arrival, can be taken as typical of what we mean by 
transmission (on condition that we set aside the element of 
finality to be found in it). If this be so, a quality can only be trans- 
mitted to the extent to which it can be viewed as attached to an 
element capable of transmission, and there is little need to point 
out the obscurity of this idea of attachment or adhesion. Actually 
it is only in so far as our understanding makes a surreptitious use 
of it that we are capable of conceiving feeling or sensation as 
transmission. The ‘attachment’ is a kind of more intelligible 
equivalent of the transcription and re-transcription of the 
message. 

Tt would follow that only that which can in no way be re- 
garded as the attribute (the property that adheres) of a material 
basis within me is incapable of being transmitted. Were this 
hypothetical element that cannot be transmitted defined in terms 
of that which properly belongs to me there would be a contradic- 
tion. What belongs to me, what I have, is on the contrary precisely 
what can be transmitted. 


May 24th, 1923 
We need above all to solve the eternal difficulty that I mentioned 
312 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


at the beginning of my entry on February 2nd, 1922. I think that 
the elements of the solution can be found scattered throughout 
my notes of the last three or four years and it is only a matter 
of making a synthesis of them. What value are we to attribute 
to the statement: “This absolute thou does not exist’? There could 
be no question, | think, of establishing that this statement is 
contradictory in itself and that non-existence is incompatible with 
the content of the absolute thou; but there could be question of 
establishing that the affirmation is insignificant because what is 
posited in saying “THIS absolute thou’ is itself contradictory; 
in such a way that non-existence is predicated of a subject which 
is not really thought. In brief the question would be one of 
establishing the nothingness of the polemical attitude when the 
polemical attitude is brought to bear on what I call, though 
improperly, the religious relation. This is extremely important. 
It means that as soon as we adopt a polemical attitude regarding 
the object of religion, the object of religion changes its nature. 

This becomes clearer to me: in our metaphysical discussions 
we always actually set out from a symbol that is visual—the 
symbol of an object which remains what it is, which does not 
change its nature when, without ceasing to regard it, we move 
farther away from it. Rightly or wrongly, and without defining 
the idea absolutely, we even admit that there is a sort of optimum 
position from which we will get the best possible view of this 
object. Must we not make up our minds to state that the ‘religious 
relation’ can never be regarded as such an object? 

To put it more concretely let us imagine that I am looking at 
a landscape with a friend and that my friend points out to me what 
he takes to be a mountain on the horizon. It may well happen 
that I have better sight than he has or merely that I am better 
informed about the topography of the region; and so I say to him 
‘Your mountain is a cloud.’ There I think we have the type of 
comparison that is inapplicable in the field of religion. It seems 
to me that were I to say to a believer: “Your God . . . isacloud’ 
I would be guilty of a paralogism. In the first instance we are 
dealing with a world which is common both to my friend and to 
myself. My friend and I myself are talking of the'same thing and in 
relation to this thing we have taken?up positions that’are com- 
parable in the strict sense (and, moreover, our positions have the 


313 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


momentous characteristic of being interchangeable) and so as to make 
a correct judgment in practice I would take my friend’s place and if 
possible would even submit myself to the same optical conditions 
as he (I would borrow his binoculars, etc.). Whereas in the order 
of religion such a change of position is by very definition im- 
possible. I am unable to take my friend’s place for a number of 
reasons, of which the most striking is that he zs not distinct from 
his place, that he is that very place itself (and this applies equally 
in the instance of love: I cannot hope to see my friend’s mistress 
through his eyes without becoming my friend, whereupon it 
becomes impossible for me to appreciate the woman in question 
otherwise than as he does). 

It must be agreed that though this process of argument may be 
impressive, it leaves our minds the prey to the kind of irritation 
which is invariably associated with the notion of existence. 

Here, as is evident, we could once more take up all the argu- 
ments that I formerly developed regarding the impossibility of 
the enquiry whose conclusions are summed up in every theory of 
atheism (this is not God’s work, nor that, nor again that, hence 

. . etc.). But even if we were to agree that this is valuable there 
is an enormous difficulty still outstanding. “We agree,’ we may 
say, ‘that we cannot touch faith as such. But it is precisely this 
that makes us think of faith as a kind of residue which we 
are not bound to take into account. It cannot be refuted, it 
cannot even be refuted, it is below the plane on which refutation 
is possible, and it is negligible. In our universe what is not 
susceptible of becoming a common good must be relegated to 
the cellars of human life with those incommunicable and inex- 
pressible feelings that a healthy man should learn always to dis- 
miss.’ Thus what is needed is the possibility of safeguarding the 
existence of the absolute zou without attributing to it an object- 
ivity that would ruin its essence. It is at this point that my 
efforts to dissociate existence and objectivity attain their full 
significance. 

Existence is not a state and that is why it is meaningless 
to speak of a transition from non-existence (or potentiality) to 
existence. This is another way of saying that it is impossible 
to distinguish between the existant and existence. But we need to 
know whether this is anything more than a mere formula. I think 


314 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


I have glimpsed that there is in existence the wherewithal to 
dissolve the object as object; save that we are immediately held 
up by the element of confusion in this way of expressing it. In 
fact there can be no question of viewing existence as a quality 
which conflicts with the qualities that constitute the object. 
However much I grapple with this idea I am forced to admit 
that I still find it very obscure. Formerly I identified the existant 
with that which can be indicated. But we must grasp that we 
are not dealing here with mere indication but with identification by 
the senses. What exists should be capable at one and the same 
time of being given as datum and of being identified. Here we 
must refer back to the notes I made in 1917. Those notes expressed 
very well what I saw so clearly at Sens. What at that time I 
failed sufficiently to discern was that the centre, or the immediate 
- experience, from which these contents take their departure, is not 
a simple feeling—or rather that this feeling is bound up, in a 
way that is unthinkable (doubtless this unthinkableness can be 
demonstrated and the elements of the demonstration are even to 
be found in my notes), with the representation of an object which 
is my body: it is in relation to me as conscious of my body, that 
is to say as grasping it at one and the same time as object (body) 
and as non-object (my body) that all existence is defined. In a 
word, to state the existence of a being or of a thing would be to 
say: This being is of the same nature as my body and belongs to 
the same world; only this homogeneity doubtless bears less on the 
(objective) essence than on the intimacy that the word my, my 
body, involves. In this way we could explain that which in exist- 
ence is incapable of definition—since the fact for my body of 
being my body is not something of which I can genuinely have 
an idea, it is not something that I can conceptualise. In the fact 
of my body there is something which transcends what can be called 
its materiality, something which cannot be reduced to any of its 
objective qualities. And the world only exists for me inasmuch 
as I think it (this expresses it badly), inasmuch as I apprehend it 
as bound up with me by the thread which also binds me to my 
body. 
To this must be linked the fact that the world only exists 
inasmuch as I can act on it: for there is only action inasmuch as 


I am my body, inasmuch as I cease to think my body. The non- 
OF 


METAPHYSICAL JOURNAL 


objectivity of my body becomes clear to’our mind as soon as we 
remember that it is of the essence of the object as such that it 
does not take me into account. In the measure in which it does 
not take me into account my body seems to me not to be my body. 

This summary is very important. It should throw some light 
on the problem I stated yesterday. But 1 will only reach my goal 
by roundabout ways. 

At this immediate moment I am wondering whether we cannot 
throw light on the nature of belief by setting out from this theory 
of existence. Is not belief always the act by which I skip over 
one of the continuous series which bind up my immediate 
experience to a particular fact, and treat this fact as if it were 
given to me in the same way as my own body is given to me? It 
must of course be emphasised that my body is not an object of 
belief: all belief is based on the model of that which is not, 
in itself, a belief. But in that case might it not be said that all 
belief comes to bear on facts of a material order? No, because I 
can conceive infinite prolongations of the central act, unlimited 
possibilities of vision, etc. There is no need to underline how 
much this conclusion strengthens what I would like to call 
my ‘sensualistic’ metaphysics. For obviously the connection 
between existence and sensation is as close as it could be. Is the 
connection with the theory of the thou equally easy to grasp? 
As I see things at present, it is. We must set out from the him, 
from the that. That is that of which I speak to someone else, 
ie. that from which I turn away, in a word that which I treat as 
not taking into account the act by which I think it (and here I am 
speaking of a concrete, detailed and present thought). Briefly, 
I put my emphasis on objectivity and not on existence, if we 
understand existence in the sense explained above. To treat a 
being as not taking us into account is in some way to disinterest 
ourselves from this being (even if we concentrate our attention 
on it); it is to adopt an attitude which is fundamentally opposed to 
the attitude implied by love. This needs defining. If I treat a being 
as not taking me into account, to what extent does that mean that 
I do not take him or it into account? The answer to this question 
seems to me very plain: it is that I do not treat him as a me, as 
possessing the faculty of depending on himself and taking him- 
self into account, the faculty which is at the very root of existence. 


316 


GABRIEL MARCEL 


Yet there is an obscure point here. If we say of someone that 
‘he will always go his own way’ do we not, though treating him 
as a him, nevertheless attribute to him that self-mastery I spoke of 
a moment ago? I leave this subsidiary point aside. Nevertheless, 
we need to recognise clearly the transition from existence to 
presence; and I am wondering whether it is not by presence that 
we can effect the transition from existence to value. Is not that 
which has value also that which increases in us the feeling of 
presence (it is immaterial whether we are concerned with our 
presence or with the presence of the universe). In these reflections 
there is one essential point—they seem to make possible a transi- 
tion from metaphysics to ethics; for our worth is decreased to 
the extent to which our affirmation of existence is limited, pale 
and hesitant. 


317 


APPENDIX 


EXISTENCE AND OpsjectTivity! 


ee we review the evolution of metaphysical doctrines 
during the last century or so we are struck by the large 
measure of agreement amongst idealist philosophers about re- 
ducing to a minimum the rdle of existence and of the existential 
index in the general economy of knowledge. They carry out this 
reduction for the benefit of all kinds of rational definitions— 
some people would say values—which confer an intelligible 
content on thought. Thus existence is made to appear as some- 
thing on which thought is perhaps so to speak propped up, but 
of which, for the same reason, thought tends more and more to 
lose sight. Doubtless we could discuss further the extent to which 
this or that particular philosopher adopts this attitude in question. 
But I think there is no denying that the attitude became more 
and more clear in the course of the last century and it is even 
involved in the very definition of a certain kind of idealism. 
What must be noticed first and foremost is that the more em- 
phasis put on the odject as object, together with the characteristics 
that constitute it as object, and the intelligibility with which it 
needs to be weighted so as to provide a grip for the subject who 
confronts it, the more philosophers leave the existential aspect— 
I will not say the existential character—of the object in the shade. 
We can use a simple metaphor to describe the logical situation 
that the mind tends to create for itself; and say that thought 
confers on objects a sort of insularity in relation to itself. The 
object is bathed in this insularity just as it is bathed in space and 
perhaps fundamentally decause it is bathed in space. And by the 
fact that the bonds that tie it to the hypothetical Grund or basis 
of things are to all appearances broken, it seems as though it can 
be tackled from every angle. Hence the tendency to establish 


1 This article is reproduced from the Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale. In it I disen- 
tangle several of the fundamental themes of the Metaphysical Journal. 


ay 


APPENDIX 


between thought and the object a relation of agreement which is 
strictly stable and satisfying; and on the basis of this relation it is 
easy to build up scientific knowledge, without for this reason 
feeling any necessary obligation to accept the theses of Criticism 
in detail. But what is deliberately set aside here is the mode in 
which the object is present to the person who considers it or, which 
amounts to the same thing, the mysterious power of self- 
affirmation by which it confronts a spectator. On a deeper level 
there is the question of how it comes about that this object is not 
only a rationally articulated spectacle but also possesses the power 
of affecting in a thousand ways the being of the person who 
contemplates it and is submitted to it. This sense-presence of 
the ‘thing’ which, if it is not identified with its existence, at least 
appears to unbiased reflection as its immediate manifestation 
and revelation—it is this that a philosophy which is orientated 
at one and the same time towards ideas and towards objects 
necessarily tends to conjure away. Thus we can easily conceive 
how beyond this idealist theory, which though not denying 
existence brushes it away to an infinite distance, it is possible 
to construct a radical thesis which views existence as capable of 
being called into question and perhaps even as self-contradictory. 

I would like at the outset to show that there is nothing 
problematical in existence and that if scepticism sets out to attack 
it it tends to destroy itself. To doubt existence is to say that it 
is not possible to affirm validly regarding anything that chat 
exists. But, as we immediately see, this doubt itself presupposes 
a definite idea of existence that we hesitate to apply. Thus it 
seems that between this idea and the experience there is no 
guaranteed contact. We do not set out from a this which certainly 
does exist so as to ask whether shat also exists.1 We doubt the 
application of this idea considered as a whole. But how then are 
we to avoid being tempted to conclude that this idea is a pseudo- 
idea, that it has no hall-mark to guarantee it and that it must be 
thrown on to the scrapheap as a useless tool? Thus when this 


? Yet it is in the second way that people generally proceed when questioning themselves 
about the existence of God. The statement that Tom, Dick or Harry exists is treated 
as a datum which is beyond all denial. Does God also exist? If we followed this train 
of thought we might be able to show without being paradoxical that contemporary 
writers and philosophers who tend to dissolve belief in the reality of Tom, Dick and 
Harry are indirectly preparing the way for specifically religious affirmations. 


320 


APPENDIX 


Scepticism goes a little deeper, I think it is inevitably converted 
into a negative doctrine. 

This could be shown in yet another way. Doubt is at least 
a provisional and recognised rupture of a particular attachment or 
adhesion; it is a ‘disengagement’ and hence it can only be exer- 
cised after the event when thought is confronted by a duality. But 
if existence cannot ever be regarded as a predicate we do not 
appear to be confronted here with anything of the kind. It is only 
the structure of language which obliges us to ask if there is some- 
thing which possesses existence. In reality existence and the thing 
that exists obviously cannot be dissociated. We are faced here 
with a synthesis whether real or not on which doubt can have no 
grip; there is no gap or interval, so to speak, into which the sharp 
point of doubt can be inserted. Hence the mind can only proceed 
here by means of a fiat or decree. And this applies to the idealist 
philosophers to whom I have already alluded. They refuse to 
admit that there is any ground for applying the existential index— 
they proscribe its use. It would be easy to show, furthermore, that 
these idealist doctrines always tend to substitute hypothetical pro- 
positions in place of categorical propositions and to think the 
world under the form of pure legality: if7t is true that . . . it is 
also true that . . . In this way existence seems to be surmounted, 
or reabsorbed, or simply conjured away. Now I do not believe 
that this enterprise is self-contradictory. Doubtless any attempt 
to think the world scientifically is inconceivable unless there be a 
fundamental decision of this kind. But on the other hand I 
cannot see how we can conceal from ourselves the narrow and 
artificial element in this decision. From this standpoint the 
actuality of any experience is treated as though it needs to be 
immediately surmounted, thanks to the mind deliberately cutting 
the cables: and as soon as it has got into its swing the mind owes 
it to itself to forget the irreducible and apparently primary element 
in this actuality, and hence it no longer sees it as anything more 
than an opportunity—which is at bottom contingent—for de- 
ploying its own immanent powers of universality. 

That such a way of thinking is justified in part where the mind 
is involved in achieving determined ends and constituting a body 
or a system of truths, I have no intention of contesting. But that 
this constitutes the whole of philosophy and that in this way we 


321 


APPENDIX 


can exhaust all speculative activity, I am quite unable to admit. — 
The ever-widening gulf between this mode of thinking and 
integral human experience with its life that trembles with tragedy, 
is enough to show up its inadequacy. The reasons for which I am 
unable to accept this mutilation will doubtless become clearer 
in the pages that follow. 

If the negation of existence is a decree or fiat, for my part 
I choose the contrary decree and have no hesitation in declaring 
that for me existence is beyond all doubt. Yet we need to be pre- 
cise about the meaning of a statement that is so obviously ambig- 
uous as this. For we risk running into the following dilemma: 

Either there is something that exists, something in particular, 
whose nature we will be asked to define exactly, something that 
we are obliged to indicate; 

Or else—which is beyond doubt—it is existence in general; 
and it seems plainly a priori that this is only an empty and doubt- 
less mythical abstraction. 

This is the first point that we need to clear up. 

Evidently the former of these alternatives must be dismissed 
for reasons already mentioned. To speak of something that exists 
is to re-establish in a more or less explicit way the notion of 
existence as a predicate. Moreover, the attribution of a predicate 
to a subject can always raise a problem. I am unable to see 
how the seal of that which cannot be doubted can be attached to a 
statement bearing on the existence of any kind of particular reality. 

But the second alternative seems to me just as disastrous as 
the former. What is existence in general? Does not this way of 
expressing myself set up between the fact of existing and that 
which exists, the very duality that I rejected? This would un- 
doubtedly be so if we were obliged to regard existence in general 
as a concept; but it is that precisely that 1 think we must expressly 
deny at the outset. The assurance whose nature we are trying to 
disentangle here could no more bear on an abstract characteristic: 
than on a that to which this characteristic belongs; it can only 
bear on the indissoluble unity of existence and of the existant. 
This assurance is of a global character and, as we have already 
seen, it would be dangerous to review it in detail. What is given 
to me beyond all possible doubt is the confused and global 


experience of the world inasmuch as it is existant; and here even 
322 


APPENDIX 


the term ‘given’ fits only imperfectly. Given normally signifies 
presented to a subject. Now here I\would not like to insinuate 
anything of the kind from motives which I hope to illustrate clearly 
in the following study. At this point must restrict myself to 
pointing out that this assurance appears to us as though constitu- 
tive of what we habitually call the subject, It is not added to it or 
provided for it; without this assurance the subject ceases to be any- 
thing, it disappears or at least is reduced to a logical shadow of 
itself. 

Hence the impossibility of introducing into our affirmation of 
existence a specification which is not arbitrary and therefore de- 
structive. To say that J exist is only legitimate on condition that 
we recognise at the outset that here the word J does not signify 
the ego as normally understood; that it is not a content or a 
psychological system even reduced to a sort of minimum. Nor can 
there be any question of contrasting this existant J with something 
else which does not exist. 

At this point we ought to admit that we are strictly incapable 
of sifting out what exists from what does not exist. And provi- 
sionally at least, perhaps also permanently, we should view as 
excluded the very possibility of any such discrimination. The 
idea of a criterion of existence is bound up with the notion that 
existence is a characteristic and that an experience of it, or a 
reasoned enquiry about it, will enable us to determine whether or 
not it is applicable to a particular content. Thus it would not be 
legitimate to say ‘J exist’ unless the J is presupposed to be the 
express negation of-any particular content and of anything that 
can be brought into the category of the ‘this or that.’ 

But, as we immediately see, when the J exist is thus cleared of 
private meaning, it tends to merge with an affirmation such as 
‘the universe exists’, the universe itself also being the negation 
of ‘something in particular’ without thereby necessarily being 
reduced to the general and the abstract. 

Thus our first conclusion is that unless the mind deliberately 
wagers against existence it knows itself to be fortified by an 
unquestionable assurance regarding the existence not of any par- 
ticular thing nor even regarding existence in general, but regard- 
ing the existing universe. This assurance is as little as possible 
external to the mind even though the mind has the singular 


333 


APPENDIX 


power of detaching itself from this assurance—thereby running 
the risk, as must be admitted, of upsetting it and even of causing 
a profound alteration in its nature. 

Perhaps it will be objected that all I have said so far is really 
more posited than proved. I am perfectly ready to agree about 
this, as I consider that the very idea of bringing a demonstration 
to bear on the primacy of existence seems to me radically con- 
tradictory. Our only possible procedure here consists in reflecting 
on affirmations whose titles of credit, so to speak, need to be 
examined. 

That existence cannot be treated as a demonstrandum is some- 
thing that we cannot fail to perceive as soon as we observe that 
existence is primary or it zs not—that in no case can it be regarded 
as capable of being reduced or derived. Nor is the affirmation of 
being of the order of the principles which we reach by way of 
regression. For principles only obtain in the infra- or supra- 
existential world from which precisely we are trying to escape. 
Thus we are confronted with an assurance which coincides closely 
with the reality on which it bears, a reality that is as global as the 
assurance itself. Here once again I am constrained to put the reader 
on his guard against the terms I need to use. For in the words 
‘bear on’ there is something that is not strictly applicable here, 
something that can only be applied to a judgment. We posit that 
a judgment refers to an object distinct from itself, that it points it 
out as an index does. But here there is no question of referring. 
In this respect I would be prepared to admit that the fundamental 
assurance we are dealing with here is of the order of sentiment or 
feeling—provided it were explicitly understood that this feeling 
must not be intellectualised and converted into a judgment, for 
any such conversion would not only change its nature but possibly 
even deprive it of all meaning. 

Hence the distinction between the idea of existence and 
existence itself—an impasse in which philosophical reflection is 
always liable to get lost—must be rejected out of hand. I myself 
am unable to view this distinction as anything more than a 
fiction that derives its birth from the arbitrary act by which 
thought claims to transform into an affirmation of objectivity 
what is really immediate apprehension and participation. 

Of course I am aware that to many minds a thesis of this 


324 


APPENDIX 


kind may look like a return to a pre-critical dogmatism. Later 
I hope to throw light on the reasons why any such accusa- 
tion leaves me undisturbed. Moreover, in my view, dogmatism 
is more of an attitude of mind than a doctrine. There is a dog- 
matism in criticism, a dogmatic way of excluding dogmatism, 
whose internal contradictions seem to me to link it up with modes 
of philosophical speculation that are definitely over and done 
with. Whatever be the value of a discipline which bears essen- 
tially on the conditions and the criteria of objectivity I cannot see 
anything to dispense us—or a fortiori prohibit us—from identi- 
fying the limits of objectivity, and from trying to penetrate beyond 
’ objectivity (I hope this spatial metaphor will be forgiven) so as to 
reach a domain in which the classical relation between subject and 
object ceases to be strictly applicable. 

What I have already said is doubtless enough to enable the 
reader to discern the position that we are obliged to adopt re- 
garding the cogito of Descartes. The reality that the cogito 
reveals—though without discovering an analytical basis for it— 
is of quite a different order from the existence that we are trying 
here not so much to establish as to identify in the sense of taking 
note of its absolute metaphysical priority. The cogito introduces 
us into a whole system of affirmations and guarantees their 
validity. Jt guards the threshold of the valid and it is only on con- 
dition that we identify the valid and the real that we can speak— 
without the imprudence that is far too common—of the real as 
immanent in the act of thinking. Here, of course, we are in no 
way re-establishing an outworn distinction between matter and 
form. I have no hesitation in saying that the cogito is precisely 
the negation of this distinction and in some way the very act by 
which it is suppressed. But it certainly does not follow from this 
that the objective world to which access is opened up to us by the 
cogito coincides with the world of existence. The dualism esta- 
blished by Kant between the object and the thing-in-itself, what- 
ever objections it raises in the form in which he states it in the 
Critique, has at least had the inestimable advantage of accustoming 
people’s minds for over a century to making this indispensable 
dissociation. But it is important to be very clear in our minds that 
the existant can in no way be treated as an unknowable object, 
that is to say, as an object liberated from the very conditions 


325 


APPENDIX 


that define an object as such, It is essential to the character of the 
existant that it should occupy with regard to thought a position 
which cannot be reduced to the position implied in the fact of 
objectivity itself. And it is this position that we must now try 
to elucidate. 

Notice to begin with that I cannot avoid conceiving the 
object as ‘something with which I am in communication.’ The 
relation between subject and object is initially presented as a 
relation with two terms. Only, as Royce has pointed out with 
admirable clarity in his later philosophical work, this is only so in 
appearance; the relation is in reality a triad. The object is by 
character that regarding which I converse with a real or ideal inter- 
locutor. It is a third party in a particular conversation that I carry 
on with X . . . a conversation bearing on it. It is in this sense 
interposed between me and myself and this helps to justify the 
use of the rather surprising term insularity that 1 employed at 
the beginning of this essay. 

Only the object is not, so to speak, inert in relation to this 
conversation. It would be legitimate to say that I interrogate 
it and that it answers me. And the strength of idealist doctrines 
consists in the fact that, by delving deeper into the nature of 
this dialogue or hidden dialectic, they show that the revelations 
which seem to emanate from the object are closely conditioned by 
the active and intelligent appeals that I make to it. The idealist 
doctrines which put an increasingly emphatic accent on the insular 
character of the object are called upon to minimise the original 
contribution made by the object to us. This is easily explained. 
For the object’s contribution is, properly speaking, unthinkable 
within the closed system that one subject here tends to form with 
itself. As goes without saying, the subject becomes more and more 
‘disindividualised’ and its individual characteristics are more and 
more thoroughly strained away. This explains why idealist systems 
invariably lead to the affirmation of an identity—however con- 
crete and synthetic it be—in which all that we call our experience 
or our universe comes to be regarded as internal. Of course there 
are plenty of obstacles on this incline leading towards identity. 
But when we come across a philosopher who purports to remain 
at one of these obstacles and build his house on it, I can never 
avoid a feeling of arbitrariness, though there are plenty of reasons 


326 


APPENDIX 


that militate in favour of a political system that one contemporary 
thinker presents as a genuine metaphysical opportunism. 

One further consideration is essential. From the standpoint 
we are considering, feeling or sensation is bound to seem radically 
unintelligible in itself. We can only treat it as a kind of priming 
(unthinkable in isolation) for the complex operation by which 
the mind brings an object before itself. Whereas we need to 
adopt a different attitude to sensation, or, if you like, to the act of 
feeling, if we are to be able to establish solidly and illustrate con- 
cretely the theory of existence whose first rudiments I tried to 
set out above. 


* 


We must get right away from the general way of interpreting 
sensation or feeling which is almost universally taken for granted 
not only by philosophers and men of science but also by common 
sense itself. We find it very difficult to avoid treating sensation 
as something which is emitted by X and received by a subject, that 
is to say as something which, for the sake of terminology, I shall 
henceforward call a message. The word ‘receptivity’ is particularly 
significant in this connection. It is very difficult for the mind to 
get rid of the idea that what is emitted in a form that in X is 
perhaps unspecifiable . . . then transmitted under conditions 
that, rightly or wrongly, we think we are able to represent to 
ourselves more adequately, is finally received and transcribed by 
the sentient subject. In a word, we are all irresistibly inclined to 
suppose that to sense involves a communication like the communi- 
cation that takes place between two telegraph stations. Doubtless 
we conceive this communication differently according as to 
whether or not we profess a pan-psychist doctrine. Some suppose 
that only one of the telegraph stations is cognisant as station, or 
that the other is not for itself a station and is only apprehended 
as a siation by the person with whom it is in correspondence. 
Others are inclined to believe that the accord—or analogy— 
is of a still more intimate kind, and that the transmitting station 
already has some kind of awareness, however obscure and foreign 
to ours it be, of the message that it addresses to us. The most 
suggestive example is that of a scent or smell. Between the flower 


327 


APPENDIX 


garden whose effluvia reach me—and my organism—something 

‘travels, something is transmitted to me, that the physicist will 
simply consider to be a perturbation or commotion. People 
suppose, without asking themselves what the hypothesis means, 
that once this perturbation has been communicated to the instru- 
ment on which it is specifically qualified to cause an impression, 
it is transcribed into olfactory language. Yet one question is still 
open to debate, namely whether what really occurs is actually a 
re-transcription analogous to the one performed by the tele- 
graphist who receives a telegram, or whether at the origin of 
the perturbation there was a phenomenon analogous to the phe- 
nomenon that takes place in consciousness; in other words 
whether what I call a flower does not enjoy a confused satisfaction 
regarding its existence which becomes a perfume when it is 
communicated to me. Admittedly we may be obliged to regard 
this question as devoid of philosophical meaning. It can be solved 
—and that in an arbitrary way—only if we suppose that we our- 
selves make a choice which at bottom is essentially poetical. 
Moreover, we need to ask ourselves whether there is any meaning 
whatever in the supposition that a transcription or a translation 
of the sensorial message, from whatever origin it derives, is 
possible. 

Now, by definition, to translate means to substitute one type 
of data for another type of data, and for a translation to be 
possible these data must in some degree be an object for the mind, 
whereas in the present instance this is inconceivable. For my 
translating activity to be exercised it must be brought to bear on 
an initial datum; whereas in the case of the hypothesis we have in 
mind the event that I am supposed to translate into sense- 
language by very essence is not given to me as datum at all. We 
are led astray by the crude spatial image from which we cannot 
get away. We become victims of a confusion between the per- 
turbation communicated to our organism and the fact that this 
commotion is given as datum zo the subject. The simplest reflection 
is enough to dispose of this equivocation. The alternatives 
before us are: either I must recognise that this physical event is in 
no way given to me as datum, that it is nothing for me, whatever 
the modification that it may involve for my organism; and in 
that case it is against reason to suppose that a translation, however 


328 


APPENDIX 


mysterious, can convert this event into a datum: or else we will 
have to have recourse to the term ‘unconscious sensation’ so as to 
allow ourselves to view this event as in some way already given. 
But this second alternative may involve a very dangerous mis- 
understanding. For either we restrict ourselves to postponing 
the difficulty of inquiring how this unconscious sensation is 
possible in its turn, or else we have to admit that it is primordial 
which means that it is literally irreducible. In this latter case there 
can be no question of treating it as a message that we have received; 
and the interpretation which we were endeavouring to uphold 
straightway collapses. Nor do I see how it is possible to escape 
from these difficulties by declaring with the author of Jdentité 
et Réalité that sensation is irrational; expressions of this kind 
seem to me fundamentally ambiguous. It looks as if by ‘irrational’ 
M. Meyerson means a transition that cannot be effected, a sort 
of No-thoroughfare. For myself I cannot accept this admission of 
powerlessness and, as it were, the abdication of thought when 
faced with a cardinal fact. To say that sensation is unintelligible 
is to say that the intelligence has no grasp on reality and that 
in last analysis it is only a form without content. How, therefore, 
whatever the cost, can we avoid looking for a way of making 
this transition conceivable and bringing the act of feeling itself 
into a system of thinking? 

As will be seen immediately, there is a close connection 
between these general observations and the thesis about the 
absolute priority of existence (or, if you like, of the existential) 
that I suggested at the outset. Both alike lead us to the affirmation 
of a pure immediate, that is to say an immediate which by very 
essence is incapable of mediation. And by that we must understand 
a datum in relation to which thought is not in a condition to make 
the necessary recoil so that it is no longer a datum but is apparently 
begotten or constructed. This pure immediate, moreover, has 
the paradoxical characteristic of being incapable of specification. 
Therefore it is not something that can be said to be this or that. 
This characteristic is doubtless incompatible with the nature of 
any object whatsoever—since, as we have seen, objects are always 
defined in function of possible dialogue—and legitimately it 
belongs to the infra-objective order whose reality we are trying 
to establish. I am quite aware that there is something at least appa- 


329 


APPENDIX 


rently absurd about treating as a characteristic what is the very 
negation of any characteristic. But we must be careful to notice 
that this incoherence is really only verbal; the point on which I 
want to insist is that existence properly speaking is incapable of 
characterisation. And by this I do not mean, of course, that it is 
indeterminate but that the mind when confronting it cannot adopt 
without contradiction the attitude that is needed for characterising 
something. Hence existence has nothing in common with a subject 
that has been stripped of its predicates. For such a subject is 
fundamentally only an abstract schema for the subsequent speci- 
fications which alone are capable of conferring a reality and a 
nature upon it. 

Before proceeding further with my enquiry I would like to 
recapitulate the preliminary results of the foregoing considera- 
tions. | 

Inasmuch as my metaphysical reflection is exercised I appear 
to myself as a being (X) who interrogates himself about his own 
existence. There takes place within me—or seems to take place— 
an interior debate which appears to separate me from my own 
existence by forcing me to call into question both my own 
existence and the existence of everything else in the world. But 
the meaning of this interior debate is not obvious. To doubt 
whether anything exists—or possesses existence—is in appearance 
to posit existence as in itself beyond all doubt (whether or not 
it can be legitimately attributed). And it is to regard it as a pre- 
dicate endowed with a potentiality of application that is open to 
question and is perhaps equal to zero. It is easy to see how 
untenable this position is. A predicate which is the predicate of 
nothing cancels itself out. Hence the meaning of the debate is 
transformed. It now bears on the legitimacy of the existential 
judgment and can only be closed negatively if we adopt a monist 
theory of value and of the valid. But even supposing we could 
construct a monist system of this kind without contradiction 
there is no questioning that it must remain relative to a decree or 
option made by the mind. Now when I interrogate myself about 
existence—whether this be my existence or not—I am searching 
for what could be called an absolute answer: a solution which 
suppressed the question by depriving it of meaning would look 
like a trap. If I ask myself by what right or in what measure I 


be 


APPENDIX 


exist | do so because I presuppose that a world exists, whatever 
be its structure. To object that there is no real meaning in saying 
of anything: “That exists’, does not answer my question. Hence, 
between the two extreme philosophical positions, one of which 
consists in rejecting existence and the other in giving it the seal 
of the indubitable, I do not think that any hesitation is possible. 
We cannot reasonably hope to suppress the question of existence 
once and for all merely because, within certain limits, it can be 
eluded or even ceases to offer an intelligible meaning. But this 
existence whose primacy I believe we are obliged to recognise— 
and that by an act of genuine spiritual humility—this existence 
which is one with the existant, could not be affirmed of anything 
that can be designated, not even of the ego; and we need to exer- 
cise the greatest prudence in our choice of the formulae used to 
express what is less an abstract immanence than an effective presence. 
This presence is neither the presence of something nor of some- 
one; it could best be indicated perhaps, at least indirectly, by the 
expression absolute presence. Thus we are not even left with the 
resource of saying that the universe is present to me myself. 
Because that would involve reintroducing a duality, a distinction 
between subject and object within what by very principle can 
involve no such distinction. It is doubtless by an evocation of 
the pure act of feeling understood as an interior resonance that 
we will be best assisted, not to obtain an imaginative impression 
but ‘mentally to imitate’ this presence which ‘subtends’ the 
‘integrality’ of our experience and of any experience whatsoever. 

It may well be asked what can be the purpose of adding to the 
weight of a metaphysical instrument that is already so heavy. 
Why this out of date ontology? I think the answer is that unless 
thought is to abdicate when confronted with sensation, that is 
really to say when confronted with itself, it is obliged to look 
in the direction I have suggested for the way out that critical 
philosophy has failed to find. If sensation is to appear in some 
way intelligible, the mind must establish itself at the outset in a 
universe which is not a world of ideas. If it be possible to prove, 
as I think it is, that sensation is not susceptible of being con- 
ceived as a message, as acommunication between different stations, 
it must involve the immediate participation of what we normally 
call the subject in a surrounding world from which no veritable 


33% 


APPENDIX 


frontier separates it. It can be shown, moreover, that this initial 
postulate enables us to account for the existence of a body that 
appears to the subject to be Ais body. This is the point that we 
must now emphasise. 


* 


Inasmuch as I look on myself as carrying on communications 
with objects or, if you like, with zhings that are distinct from me, 
it is perfectly natural that my body should appear to me as inter- 
posed between those things and me, or, to be more exact, that it 
should be presented to meas pre-eminently the instrument of which 
I make use both for receiving and sending messages (whichmay, 
moreover, easily be reduced to simple signs. Inaworldconstituted 
by or at least marked out by stations in communication with one 
another, my body like other bodies functions as an apparatus for 
signalling). But when set up as an absolute this very simple and 
seductive interpretation gives rise to difficulties that are insur- 
mountable. 

In the first place the idea of interposition is very obscure 
in itself. A thing can be interposed between two things or, more 
exactly, a term can be slipped in between two terms. But is this 
logical schema applicable here? When I say that my body is inter- 
posed between me and things, I am only expressing a pseudo-idea. 
Because what I call me cannot be identified with a thing or with a 
term. Of course it is possible to say that my body is interposed 
between a body A which affects it and a body R on which it reacts. 
But in that case what happens to me, to the subject? The subject 
seems to withdraw into an indeterminate sphere from which it 
contemplates—without existing for itself{—zhe anonymous play of 
the universal mechanism. 

Yet if I adopt the purely instrumentalist way of representing 
what I call my body, I run into even worse difficulties. Note in 
the first place that the expression ‘I make use of my body’ allows 
for a very wide margin between itself and the rich and confused 
experience that it claims to translate. In the consciousness that 
I have of my body and of my relations with my body, there is 
something that this affirmation fails to render. Hence the protest 
we can scarcely repress: ‘I do not make use of my body, I am my 


a0 


APPENDIX 


body.’ In other words, there is something in me that denies the 
implication that is to be found in the purely instrumentalist notion 
of the body that my body is external to myself. And, as I see it, 
materialism constitutes an effort—though an unfortunate effort-— 
to organise this protest and transform it into a positive doctrine. 
In this respect there is an instructive connection between materi- 
alism and sensualism. Both translate one and the same defence- 
reaction of thought—and all idealists are bound to recognise that 
this is absolutely legitimate. 

It would not be enough merely to note the uneasiness with 
which the mind entertains the formulae of instrumentalism. The 
real question is whether this uneasiness can be justified rationally. 
An analysis closely resembling the analysis to which we have 
already submitted the idea of ‘message’ will enable us to answer 
this question. 

When I make use of any kind of tool, in reality I do no more 
than prolong and specialise a way of behaving that already 
belongs to my body (whether to my limbs or to my senses). 
This is just as obvious when applied to a spade or a hammer as toa 
telescope or a microscope. Not only is the instrument relative 
to my body—between the instrument and my body there is a 
deep community of nature. But given these conditions can I treat 
the body itself as an instrument? As soon as we get to grips 
with the meaning of this question we discover that we are obliged 
to imagine a physical soul furnished with powers and faculties; 
and the mechanical terms, to which my body seems reduced, are 
really only prolongations or transpositions of these powers or 
faculties. But how avoid distrusting such a hybrid notion as this? 

Either we are condemned to follow the ladder endlessly from 
physical instrument to physical instrument. 

Or else we stop arbitrarily in the series of regressions and 
maintain that an instrument can be utilised (but how?) by a 
principle (?) which has a nature quite different from itself. This 
amounts to saying that an instrument may possibly be an instru- 
ment of nothing. 

Hence there is at least an indirect justification for the repug- 
nance I feel about looking on my body as ‘something that I make 
use of.’ I feel confusedly that it is still my body that makes use 
of my body and that I am involved in a dead end. 


333 


APPENDIX 


I believe that what I should like to call instrumental mediation 
can only conceivably take place within a world of objects and 
between bodies of which none are regarded as my body, that is 
to say, as affected by this special index which in part removes it 
from the order of that about which we can hold discourse either 
with someone else or with ourselves. 

Thus, in the measure in which I speak of my body as an 
instrument, I treat it as an object, that is to say as not-mine. I 
adopt the position of a third person regarding it and any definition 
I am able to make of it is bound up with the deal disincarnation 
to which I have previously had recourse, and with the act by 
which I delegated to a sort of fictitious double the ‘power’ of 
utilising this instrument. Inasmuch as I act I identify myself with 
this double which in this way regains the reality of which I dis- 
possessed it when I detached myself from it. It follows that we 
recreate the unity that had been broken up by analysis when it 
substituted for this unity the duality of instrumentalist and 
instrument. 

Thus the réle of reflection—whether this be exercised on 
feeling or on acting—consists not in cutting to pieces and dis- 
membering but, on the contrary, in re-establishing in all its 
continuity that living tissue which imprudent analysis tore 
asunder. 

I will doubtless be blamed for substituting the unintelligible 
terms of a problem for a solution which, though perhaps imperfect, 
is at least clear. But at this point, as in the case of existence, our 
procedure must consist in asking whether thought here is not 
guilty of a dialectical abuse, that of positing a problem where there 
is not and cannot be anything problematical. What I mean is this: 
inasmuch as I consider my body either in its relations with other 
bodies or in its own structure, I am confronted with something 
which is essentially an occasion for a problem, and hence an 
object of possible knowledge, by very reason of the detachment 
from myself to which I have proceeded so as to isolate and define 
this totality of terms. To the extent to which my body lends itself 
to such treatment it is certainly converted into an object. But 
in submitting it to this treatment I cease to look on it as my body, 
I deprive it of that absolute priority in virtue of which my body 
is posited as the centre in relation to which my experience and 


334 


APPENDIX 


my universe are ordered. Thus my body only becomes an occa- 
sion for a problem under conditions such that the very problem 
that we intended to state loses all meaning. This problem consists 
in asking how my body is bound yp with the X whose body it is: 
it is only by a sort of mental sympathy, by identifying myself 
with the personality of others, that I can (or think I can) state it in 
universal terms. In reality this problem only has meaning for me 
(a me that I can expand and contract at will). But on the other hand 
it is precisely as regards me—and as regards my body—that this 
problem cannot be stated without involving a contradiction. 

This point is particularly delicate and I consider it is necessary 
to emphasise it. So as to demonstrate its contradictory character 
let us consider the above formula: how is my ody bound up 
(= what relation unites it to the X of which it is the body)? 
But the relation expressed by the genitive of wich is itself formally 
negated by the words my body. To say my body is to refuse to 
attribute it to this or that person. At first sight this may seem 
outrageously paradoxical. Instead of saying my body, could I 
not name myself, point out the person to whom the body belongs?4 
But what I am maintaining is that by this operation, which is pre- 
sented logically as the substitution of one term for an equivalent 
term, IJ effect a transition from a given order into an order that 
is irreducibly different. When I think my body (and not that of 
another person to whom I give my name) I am in a situation 
which it becomes impossible to account for as soon as I substitute 
for it the idea of a relation between terms that are hypothetically 
dissociated. For if I effect this substitution I place myself in 
conditions that are strictly incompatible with the initial state 
which it was my business to explain. 

So as to give a more complete elucidation of the meaning of 
this paradox I propose to throw a beam of light all round it 
so as to make clearer its importance. 

When I treat my body as a term which is in a certain relation 
to that of which it is the body, I misrepresent the conditions 
which permit the definition of a term in general. For only that 


which can be apprehended thanks to an act of attentive discrimin- 
1 Tt goes without saying that the whole of this discussion also bears on the here and 
the now (spatial and temporal Aicceity.) I think that, taking matters rigorously and meta- 
physically, it is not possible to substitute for these terms other designations which 
would mediatise them. 


335 


APPENDIX 


ation is susceptible of functioning as term for the mind. Now this 
only applies to my body if my thought, so to speak, retires away 
from it to a distance and considers it as an object among other 
objects. But if I proceed in this way, I am operating as though I 
had forgotten that this body is mine. I disincarnate myself in idea 
—to use the expression already employed earlier. If on the other 
hand I reintegrate myself with my body, my body ceases to appear 
to me as a possible term or object of discourse. But to think my 
body is manifestly to throw light on this re-establishment of 
possession and reincarnation; it means that I knowingly re- 
establish the state of non-division that had been broken up by 
rudimentary reflection. 

Furthermore we need, doubtless, to generalise the result we 
reached when we criticised the instrumentalist interpretation of 
the body. Whatever be the relation I pretend to establish between 
myself and my body, I will end up in error or, more exactly, I will 
in fact be speaking of something other than what I think I am 
speaking about; for if I mentally retrieve all that is implied by 
the expression ‘my body’ this ceases to be a term external to a 
further term, X, which is myself. 

But what about the instance of a passer-by who is given to me 
as datum under the aspect of a particular organic body of which 
objective knowledge is possible? I cannot avoid supposing that 
this person, P, has a psychological nature and constitutes a parti- 
cular mental system in process of development in time. Between 
this mental system and this physical system how can there not bea 
relation, X, whatever this X may be? How, in brief, if I reason by 
analogy, can I avoid concluding that I too must appear to other 
people as a particular physical system bound up with a special 
mental system, and that the relation that exists in the first instance 
must also exist in the instance of myself? At first sight such 
reasoning cannot fail to appear decisive. 

Yet for all that it may possibly be an illusion. What am I 
really trying to say when I maintain that I cannot avoid attri- 
buting to P a particular mental system? I cannot insist too much 
that this system is not an object of possible experience in the 
sense in which a portion 7 of P’s body is. Strictly speaking there 
is nothing there that can be an object for me. All that can happen 

is the production of certain material conditions that will allow me 


336 


APPENDIX 


to ‘sympathise’ with P and embrace his ‘interior becoming.’ But to 
this extent, however fallaciously and partially, I am identifying 
myself with P. Hence in relation to P’s mental system I cease to 
occupy the external position that I still maintain regarding his 
body. And it is only an illusion if I imagine things to be other- 
wise. Hence: 

Either this mental system is discovered to me, and that means 
that I have for an instant become P, that P’s body has ideally 
become my body, 

Or else P’s body continues to be ‘that other body’, an object 
situated in space and in a given manner in relation to ‘my own 
body’; but in that case P’s mental system remains entirely closed 
to me and inaccessible. 

Doubtless in practice we imagine things otherwise. We con- 
struct a certain idea of P’s mental system which remains ‘in us’, 
(that is to say we treat it as a piece of our psychological life); 
but as this idea is not P and in no way coincides with P’s mental 
reality, we are unable, without absurdity, to question ourselves 
on the relation that unites it with P’s body. The problem of the 
relations between P’s soul and body thus only arises if J take my 
stand, so to speak, in an intermediary region, a sort of between 
worlds, which for thought should only be a point of passage— 
to take one’s stand there is contradictory. As soon as I have 
attained P’s mental reality (supposing that this is possible, as I 
for my own part believe), and have become identified with it, 
there can be no longer any question of raising this problem, and— 
furthermore—this problem could not be raised before I made the 
mental journey which led from myself to P. 

This analysis would need to be filled out as follows: I am not 
satisfied with forming a mere idea (a kind of mental effigy) of 
others. By a sort of recoil I end up by executing an analogous 
operation on myself and establish an account of myself like the 
one to which I tend to reduce P. This animated account or sketch 
I call my soul, my spiritual reality; it tends to be converted into 
a personality; and it is regarding the relations of this mythical 
personality with my body (which is detached from me in the sense 
pointed out earlier) that—as a pseudo-philosopher—I embark on 
the vain enterprise of thinking. 

These considerations lead us to make a general and very 


337 


APPENDIX 


important distinction between data that are susceptible of forming 
the occasion for a problem—that is objective data—and data on 
which the mind must be based so as to state any problem whatso- 
ever. It is impossible to treat the latter data as problematic without 
involving oneself in the worst of contradictions. Sensation (= 
the fact of feeling, of participating in a universe which creates me 
by affecting me), and the intellectually indefectible bond that 
unites me with what I call my body, are data of this second kind. 
And it is easy to see that in all likelihood these data are confounded 
together at the heart of existence as we recognised (as distinct 
from identified) it at the beginning of this essay. 

What is commonly—but improperly—called the union of 
soul and body must be considered to be a metaphysical form of 
hicceity. Like hicceity this union is indivisible and reflection can 
obtain no hold upon it. Of course this is not to say that it is 
unknowable, for that would amount to supposing that it conceals 
a mechanism with a secret operation that escapes us. 

Yet here again it is difficult to deny that we seem to be not 
only going against the data of common sense but also against the 
age-long results of philosophical analysis. 

I have the idea of a movement that is to be performed, I then 
carry out this movement. How deny that there must be a relation, 
X, between the idea and the movement? But in reality we are 
being taken in by words. What I call the idea of raising my arm is 
only the abstract schematisation of a particular posture that I 
cannot really think or represent to myself, but only adopt, i.e. 
mentally reproduce. But once I have placed myself in this situa- 
tion, am I able to continue to consider the act of raising my arm 
from the outside; can I still treat it as an object? Doubtless 
yes. But the hybrid character of this position is obvious. In- 
asmuch as I identify myself with the man who ‘thinks of raising 
his arm’ this arm must appear to me as mine. Otherwise it is 
meaningless to declare that one and the same person has the idea of 
lifting his arm and really lifts it. Thus the whole question is 
reduced to: ‘How am I going to raise my arm?’ But unless this 
question is stated in purely physical and objective terms, it 
ceases to be a problem. For there is only a problem when a parti- 
cular content is detached from the context that unites it with the 
I. Now here, on the contrary, I needed to re-establish that con- 


338 


APPENDIX 


tact. Thus no physical science is possible regarding the transition 
which leads from the idea to the act, or rather, regarding what— 
by a vicious though doubtless inevitable transposition—we think 
Wwe can represent to ourselves as a communication between 
spheres that are distinct. 


THE END 


337 


INDEX 


AsgL, 1 33 

Absolute, Bradley’s, 94; neo-Hegelian, 
12, 115 

Absolute appeal, see God as absolute 
appeal 

Agnosticism, 97, 161 

Alain, 293 

Alexandrianism, 35 

Alquié, F., x 

Answer, analysis of idea of, 138-9. See 
also Question and Answer 

Apparitions, 130, 257; at moment of 
death, 251 : 

Appearance and reality, see Reality and 
appearance 

Aristotle, 13.4 

Atheism, 64-5, 98, 132, 201-2, 226-7, 
236, 280, 287, 314 

Atomism, spiritualist theory of, 177 

Attention to self, 246-7, 249 

Auto-suggestion, 265 


Bene, AIM OF, x; and love, 162, 223, 
231; and truth, x—xI, 29, 182; 
dualism of, 98; nature and problem 
of, VIII, 174, 179-84, 198, 205-73 
relation of, to being, 137; treated as 
science, 97-8 

Belief, 68, 72, 92, 153-4, 156, 316. See 
also Fait 

Berdiaev, Nicolas, vi11 

Bergson, Henri, x11, 7, 123, 130-1, 136, 
150, 177-8, 198, 201, 207, 249, 254 

Berkeley, Bishop, 262, 274 

Beyond, the, 30, 254. See also Clair- 
voyance 

Blindness, 258 

. Body, and existants, 269, 273-4; as a 
psychic unity, 189; as instrument, 
231, 242, 245-50, 256-8, 270-2, 
275, 332-4; as object, 275, 280, 
334; function of, 132, 242-9, 287; 
in relation to its surroundings, 
21-2; metaphysical, 270; non- 
objectivity of (‘I am my body’), 
243—§ 259-60, 269, 315-7, 332-33 
notion of, 125-7 


340 


Boredom, 236-7, 263, 302 
Bradley, F. H., x11, 9, 41, 94, 162, 171, 


190537239 


Cuarrry, 202-3, 283 

Charm, 300-2 

Choice, 234 

Christian religion, 45, 64-5, 83-4, 291, 


295 

Chee the function of, 52 

Clairvoyance, 163-8, 188-94, 240-2, 
250-5, 270-1 

Clarisse, 62 

Claudel, Paul, 86 

Cogito, 31, 36-45, 52, 61, 68, 71, 76, 99; 
182, 261, 288 

Communication, problem of, 175-7, 
187-91, 231, 242, 254 

Consciousness, as datum, 18-20; as 
unity of subject and object, 291-2; 
immediate, 1, 21-3, 34-5; objective, 
19, 25; of the dead, 197, 241-4; 
relation of, to my body, 18-19; 
relation of, to thought, 17, 21-35 
subjective, 19, 249; with and 
without contact, 24-5 

Conservation, idea of, 130-1, 148-52, 
178; of the past, 150-2 

Constraint, ideal, 100-2 

Conversion, 50-6, Go, 217, 233 

Corneille, Pierre, 220 

Creation, divine, 4; relation of, to con- 
servation, 151 

Creationism, doctrine of, 35 

Curel, F. de, 230 


Dare, IDEA OF, 273 

Death, 48, 188, 202, 237, 240-4, 252, 
255, 259 

Descartes, René, 36-7, 74, 143, 182, 185, 
275, 325 

Dewey, John, 187 

Divination, 129 

Dostoevsky, Feodor M., 271 (note) 

Doubt, 96, 220, 321 

Dreams, 255, 294 

Duino Elegies, x, x111 

Du Refus al Invocation, x1 


INDEX 


Evchange, Yi 784 

Ego, and faith, 41; as medium of free- 
dom, 31, 40; as object, 119, 246; 
empirical, 43-5, 263; thinking, 4o, 
44, 114, 182, 263 

Egotism, 200 

Emotion, 135, 172-4, 200 

Empiricism, 1, 43, 73 

Empiricists, 14 

Enjoyment, 145, 178, 206, 219 

Error, 42, 131 

Essays on Truth and Reality, 162 

Essence, logic of, 39—40; nature of, 33-4, 
36, 38, 64 

Establishment, 288, 293-4 

Eternity, 82, 151, 184, 237 

Etre et Avoir, X 

Evocation, 188 

Existence, and notion of truth, 29-30; 
and objectivity, 13-19, 281-2, 
314-39; and predication, 156; 
as absolute presence, 331; divine, 
31-9; doubt of, 320-2; judgment of, 
5, 23-6, 32, 57, 268; problem of, 
13-38, 268-9, 273-4, 320-4; two 
modes of, 19-23, 26 

Existential aspects, x11, 48, 269, 319, 
321, 329-30 

Experience, and learning, 177-8; denial 
of, 294; imagined, 300; mystical, 
286; religious, dilemma of, 297 

Experience-limit, 25-6 


Farrn, act of, 39, 41, 44-6, 49, 53, 57-95 
66-7, 68-72, 76-7, 302; act of, 
definition of, 68; and divine trans- 
cendence, 92; and grace, 57-9; and 
individuality, 45; and judgment of 
existence, 5, 32; and knowledge, 
32; and metaphysical doubt, 96; 
and participation in God, 5, 66-7; 
and prayer, 86-7; and religious 
history, 76; and the miraculous, 
46, 75-83; and the will, 184-6, 221; 
and theory of intelligibility, 116; 
and trial, 201, 23.4, 2373; association 
of, with love, 58, 66; of others, 66; 
problem of, 39-73, 261; realist 
aspect of, 85; subject of, 40-1; 
unity of, and its object, 67 

Fall, the, 60, 70, 122 

Famniliarity, relationship of, to intimacy, 
201; to knowledge, 147 

Feeling(s), 173, 187, 270, 304-11, 324 

Fichte, Johann, vitt, 44, 59, 29° 

Fille Sauvage, La, 230 

Finite, ideality of, 92-3 


341 


Fluid bodies, 191, 252, 270, 299 

Freedom, absolute, 56; and external 
world, 120; and necessity, 102, 
120; and reflection, 71; and the 
cogito, 31, 36-7, 40-2, 61; and 
thought, 30, 37; human and divine, 
relation between, 45, 58-9, 88, 92; 
logic of, 36; negating itself, 60, 70; 
problem of, 207, 220 

Freud, Sigmund, 308 

Fiirsichsein, 3, 70, 105 

Future, relation of, to present, 136 
192-4, 197 


> 


Gedachtsein, 51 

Gegebensein, 1, 51 

Gifford Lectures, vir, vim1, x1 

God, and the believer, 158-9, 283; as 
absolute appeal, 262-4, 281, 298; 
as a freedom, 35-7, 58; as a third 
party, 154-7, 261-3; as creator, 
4-5, 159} as first principle of con- 
servation, 151; as hypothesis (de- 
nied), 230; as the absolute thou, 
137, 160, 229, 273, 283-4; as 
transcendent, 35 (see also trans- 
cendence, divine); fatherhood of, 
35, 46, 66, 86; judgments on, 64-5, 
73, 77, 89, 132, 156, 238, 261; 
relation of, with me, 59, 137, 
229-30; saint’s realisation of, 3-4, 

46, 73 

Good, idealist theory of, 88-91 

Good and evil, 65 

Grace, ee of, 50-1; divine, 86; 
uestion o —60, 69, 71, 238,290 

Gréce, peta » 53 2 99, 71, 239,29 

Gratitude to God, 210 

Green, T. H., 37 

Guilt, 215-8 


Hax.ucrnations, 15, 25, 51, 298 

Happiness, 208, 289 

Hartmann, Karl Robert Eduard von, 280 

Hate, 223 (note) 

Have and are, concept of, 309-12 

Hegel, G. W. F., vit, vit, 2, 11, 12, 22, 
38, 40, 49, 76, 92, 98, 102, 113, 205, 
220, 290 

Heidegger, Martin, 1x 

Heredity, psychology of, 312 

Hicceity of time and space, 82, 129, 335 
(note), 338 

History, and idea of situation, 136-7; 
and religion, see Religion, and the 
historical factor; of self, 118-9; 
philosophy of, 2-4, 26 


INDEX 


Hocking, William Ernest, 236 
Hoffding, Harold, 133 

Homo Viator, x 

Hope, definition of, 266 
Hume, David, 296 (note) 
Hyppolite, Jean, vii 


1. conoclaste, L’, 132 (note), 160 

Idea, the, 20-1, 48, 120-1, 133 

Idealists, 13, 162, 277, 287, 292, 321, 326 
3333 absolute, 9 

Identité et Réalité, 329 

Identity, 112, 117, 255, 292, 326 

Ideo-plastic theory, 251 

Ill-will, 289 

Imagination, 26, 136 

Immediate, philosophy of, 1, 5, 198, 
247-8, 256-7, 275, 278, 293, 329 

Immortality, 132-4, 153, 230 

Indigence, interior, 288-9, 290 (note), 
302 

Individuality, 44, 61-2, 86, 123, 221, 
238, 272 

Information, communication of, 175-7 

Inspiration, 291, 298 

Intelligibility, theory of, 51, 53, 102-117, 
121 

Interiority, 62, 205 

Internal and external, relation between, 
130 

Interrogation, 138 

Intimacy, 201, 303 

Intuition, x, 8, 70 

Invocation, 171-3, 222, 252, 270, 281-3 


James, WILLIAM, 41 

Job, 202 

Joy, 236 

Judgment, atheist, 202; exact, 162; in 
2nd person, 156-7; in 3rd person, 
202; on God, see God, judgments 
on; on self, 221, 234, 239 

Justification, 235-8 : 


Kanr, Immanuel, 6-8, 23, 26, 29, 37, 
74-5, 96, 102-3, 125, 146, 203, 205, 
211-14, 247, 268, 291, 325 

Knowledge, definition of, 139, 1433 
scientific versus metaphysical, 296, 
298; theory of, 304 


LasertHonniere, PERE, 174, 198 
Language, Marcel’s revaluation of, 1x 
Lavelle, 291 

Learning, act of, 177-8 
Lebensanschauung, 203 


342 


Leibnitz, Gottfried W. von, 2, 33-4, 
134, 184, 264, 286 

Lodge, Sir Oliver, 133-4 

Logic of Essence, The, 113 (note) 

Love, and familiarity, distinction be- 
tween, 147; and idea of being, 222, 
231; and idea of immortality, 133; 
and knowledge, 62-4, 221; and the 
thou, 146-59, 163, 221, 223; as a 
phenomenon of nature, 233-4; 
between God and the believer, 58, 
65; dualism of, 63; importance of, 
210-11; of self, 200; problem of, 
231-4, 275, 304, 307, 314; sub- 
jectivist conception of, 222-3; 
subject to divine mediation, 63, 66; 
union of, with faith, 58 

Lot or portion, idea of, 238-9, 263-4 

Loyalism, 272 


Maarc, 130, 297, 299 

Marx, Karl, 1x 

Materialisation, 130, 191, 256 

Materialism, 90, 241, 259, 333 

Mediation, absolute, 248, 275; instru- 
mental, 245-56, 334; sympathetic 
or non-instrumental, 246-7, 252, 
269, 274 

Memory, 149-50, 163-5, 169, 177-8, 
190, 192, 240, 250; as negation of 
time, 130. See also Recollection 

Metaphysical need, 288, 290 

Metaphysical uneasiness, 292-3 

Metaphysics and Psychism, 240 

Metaphysics and Reality, 292 

Meyerson, M., 329 

Mill, John Stuart, 271 

Mind, and exteriority, 102-4, 108-9, 
122, 124; and faith, 44-6; and soul, 
121-4; creation of, 120, 123; effort 
of, to communicate, 188-91 

Miracles, definition of, 83; problem of, 
46-7, 75-83 

Monadism, 53, 61, 215 

Monism, and pluralism, 94-5; as doc- 
trine of identity, 117 

Monde Cassé, La, vit 

Moralism, pure, 91 

Morality, 212-19 

Music, 233, 276 

Mystery, xX, 160-1, 296, 303 


Naruratism, 88, 229, 264 

Nature, philosophy of, 98; reason for 
order in, 107 

Necessary, the, problem of, 99-103 

Neo-Hegelians, 9, 12-13, 90, 113, 115 


INDEX 


Neo-Platonism, 130 
Neo-Socratism, x11 

Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, x 
Nihilism, 179, 183 
Non-intelligible, problem of, 112 
Norms, value of, 9, 106-7, 111 
Nostalgie del’ Etre, La, x 


Osuecr, definition of, 261. See also Sub- 
ject and object 

Objectivity, and existence, see Existence 
and objectivity; and questions and 
answers, 140 ~ 

Objects, existence of, outside ourselves, 
13-14, 17, 261-2 

Obsession, 201 

Optimism, logical, 9, 12, 90; meta- 
physical, 88-91, 96-7 

Osty, 192 


Paperrewskt, IGNACE JAN, 272 

Palais de Sable, Le, 62 (note), 85 (note), 
133, 153, 238 

Pan-psychist theory, 15, 327 

Pantheism, 211 

Past, as subject (‘I am my past’), 164, 
249-51, 259, 276; conservation of, 
150-2; in relation to present, 192, 
197, 240-1; of the world, § 

Perfume, see Scent 

Personality, 256-7, 303-4 

Personal life, 255-8 

Personal survival, problem of, 241 

Pessimism, 9, 97-8, 123, 181, 198 (note) 
280, 284 

Philosophy, method in, 2, 5, 73-4 

Plato, 8, 107, 121-2, 212, 219, 288, 292 

Plotinus, 35 

Pluralism, 61, 95 

Poincaré, Henri, 74 

Porte-Glaive, 132 

Prayer, 123, 133, 137, 159-60, 170, 200 
204, 223-6, 228, 263-8, 272, 296; 
for enlightenment, 267-8; onto- 
logical value of, 225; principle of, 
86; problem of, 86-9 

Predicates. See Subject and predicate 

Prediction, 136, 152-3, 192 

Premonition, 253 

Presence and action, contrast between, 

or 

PPvacar. absolute, 56, 82-3; one and 
only, 196-7. See also Future and 
Past 

Preservation. See{Conservation 

Progress, notion of, 123 

Prophecy, 152, 195, 253-4, 276 


Proust, Marcel, 165, 179, 198 (note), 
259, 299 (note), 310 

Proximity, psychical and spatial, 170 

Psychometry, 166, 191, 259 


Qussrion AND ANSWER, 138-44, 147-8, 
153-5, 158, 197, 199-200, 268 


Rarronaxism, 284-5, 288; Kantian, 
211 

Ravaisson, 177 (note) 

Realism, 2-3, 52, 103, 121-3, 161-2, 
238, 292, 294 

Reality, and appearance, 9-11, 48, 51, 
63, 98, 285, 301-6; as a third party, 
146, 264; problem of, for materi- 
alism and spiritualism, 90-1 

Reason, 73-5, 211 

Recollection, and telepathy, 169; Berg- 
son’s theory of, 130-1, 177; con- 
servation of, 149-50, 178-9; effort 
of, 144. See also Memory 

Redressement. See Establishment 

Reflection, and error, 131-2; and faith, 
53, 67-71; and feelings, 310, 3345 
pure (consciousness as), 1-2, 31, 
69; 71, 97, 99; transcended by 
religious thought, 50, 97 

Religion, and science, relation between, 
45, 96; and the historical factor, 
47-9, 75-84; and the moral order, 
contrast between, 267-8; bases of, 
40, 53, 123; transcendence of, for 
the believer, 84 

Religious life, and realism, 238; and 
temptation, 268; safeguarding of, 
266 

Repertory. See Tabulation 

Revelation, 79, 160, 302-3 

Richardson, 231 

Rilke, R. M.,; x 

Romeo and Juliet, 309 

Rome Sauvée, 144 

Royce, Josiah, 146, 196, 198, 221, 235, 
263, 268, 272, 326 


Saints, SIGNIFICANCE OF, 3—4, 46-8, Go, 
73, 82, 277 

Salvation, idea of, 150, 182, 291 

Sartre, Jean-Paul, x1, x11 

Satisfaction, idea of, 206-10 

Scene, psychical unity of, 168, 193-4, 
241 

Scent or perfume, 256, 275, 277-9, 311, 
327-8 

Scepticism, 13, 119, 320 


INDEX 


Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph 
von, 288, 294 

Schopenhauer, Arthur, 97, 280 

Science, relation of, to religion, 45, 96, 
137 

eebad sight, 167, 195-7, 250, 254 

Secret, metaphysical value of, 229, 283 

Sein und Zett, 1X 

Self-sufficiency, 210 

Sensation, 17, 131-2, 187-8, 231, 243, 
256-9, 270-1, 275, 277-9, 287, 312, 
316, 327-31, 338 

Simmel, Georg, 203 

Situation, unity of, 136-7 

Society and moral consciousness, 215 

Sorrow, 201 

Soul, and body, relations of, 18, 48, 
124-7, 245-8, 260-1, 277, 338; as 
medium of the mind, 121-3; 
definitions of, 291; in relation to an 
order, 269; to events, 269; to God, 
200; to prayer, 265-6 

Space, and judgment of existence, 26-7; 
as a datum given in time, 129 

Spinoza, Benedict (Baruch), vir 

Spir, 9-10, 12, 43 

Spiritist problem, 163, 197, 251-4. See 
also Clairvoyance 

Spirits, identification of, 163 

Spiritual aura, 251-5, 258, 276-7 

Spiritual power, 150 

Spiritual substance, 257 

Stoicism, 88—90 

Subject, and object, relation of, 13-14, 
G75 LOls 193.0 2a0,5 2575) 2025) 504, 
325-6; and predicate, 162, 220, 222, 
249, 276, 286, 330 

Surroundings, habitual, and self, 259, 
299 


Tasutation, 
249 

Taine, Hippolyte, 107 

Tasks, 290-1 

Telepathy, 134-5, 168-70, 246, 
253, 265 

Temptation, 159, 201, 239 

Test, See Trial 

Theodicy, as atheism, 64-5 

Thou, absolute, 281, 313-14 (see also 
God, as the absolute thou); theory 
of, 157-8, 163, 165, 199-200, 212, 
219, (221, 258, 284-9. (2015, 296, 
302-3, 316 

Thought, and identity, 112; and im- 
mediate consciousness, 21; and 
intelligibility, 105-12, 114, 116; as 
reason, 75; dialectical, 162; indi- 


188, 


177-8, 199-200, 


251, 


344 


vidual, 115, 119-20; in relation to 
space and time, 109; in relation to 
truth, 27-30; intuitive, and faith, 
72; mechanism in order of, 74; 
mediatory role of, 12, 99, 113; 
relation of, to the extended, 113; 
religious, and the present, 266; 
religious, and reflection, 97, 99 

Time, and space, problem of, 293-4; 
beginning of, 6-7, 11; Bergsonian 
theory of, 7; ideality of, 5-6, 10-11; 
origin of, 11, 129; problem of, 
3-12, 48, 56; relation of, to action, 
271, 273 

Transcendence, act of, 185; divine, 2, 
57-8, 67-8, 86, 92; 296 

Transliving, 165 

Transmission, 312. See also Communica- 
tion 

Trialism, 155, 162 

Trial or test, idea of, 180-3, 201-5, 
234-5, 237, 268, 291 

Truth, as mind, formula of, x1; eternal, 
143, 150-1; existence of, 13, 27, 
29; idea of, 67; relation of, to being, 
182; to thought, 27-31, 182 


Unconscrous, definition of, 176, 199 

Un Homme de Dieu, 153 (note) 

Universality, 86, 93-4, 99, 180, 203, 321 

Unsayable, the, 232-3 

Unverifiable, the, 28-31, 
(note), 242 

Urgefiihl, 247, 310 (note) 


36-7, 154 


Vatve, ABSOLUTE, 179; idea of, x1, 40, 
123, I§I, 161, 174, 239-40, 302, 
317; of persons, 295 

Verification, 27-30, 154 (note), 242, 283 


Wacer, ea OF, 291, 323 

Ward, James, 231 - 

Whole, reality as, 155, 158 

Will, 107, 130, 184-7, 220-1, 224-5, 
234, 258, 289-91, 300-1; divine, 
235, 266-7, 272 

With, implications of, xm, 170, 201 

World, as pure legality, 321; as reflec- 
tion of knowledge, 108; completed 
by the mind, 108; external, and 
thought, 116-17, B15; external, 
reality of, 13, 17, 25-6, 33, 3153 
ideality of, 7, 11; in third person, 
229-30; origin "ok age 


ZaratHustra, 210 
Zernetz, 196, 253 


4 
cot. 
ire, 

- 


“« _— = on 


i 
a4; 


7 5 
oe a _ 


cS >< 2 bik: en 
viol eae os 4 
. 7 "- - a, ’ 


by 


i om. 


eoteeseten 


—to> | 
i 
prpeete 


